[Svbtle](https://svbtle.com)
============================

[Svbtle](https://svbtle.com)
----------------------------

[](#show-drop)

-   ##### [Siraj Ravel\
    is writing on the\
    Svbtle network.](https://svbtle.com)

-   [rss feed](/feed)
-   [SVBTLE](https://svbtle.com)
-   [magazine](https://svbtle.com/magazine)
-   [about svbtle](https://svbtle.com/about)
-   [@svbtle](http://twitter.com/svbtle)
-   [rss feed](https://svbtle.com/feed)
-   \

[](https://svbtle.com)

Svbtle
======

[Siraj Ravel](http://llsourcell.svbtle.com)

[Siraj Ravel](http://llsourcell.svbtle.com)
-------------------------------------------

[SocialCoin: A Cryptocurrency for a Global Basic Income](http://llsourcell.svbtle.com/socialcoin-a-cryptocurrency-for-a-global-basic-income)
============================================================================================================================================

Jul 14, 2014

Robotics and automation technology is advancing at an accelerating rate.
Within a few decades, everything that can be automated will be
automated. Construction, agriculture, folding Chipotle burritos,
anything that requires a repetitive labor-based task will be automated
by machines. This can be seen as a problem, since almost half of the
current employment landscape in the US is devoted to labor-based jobs.
If robots will soon do all of those jobs, without requiring pay or any
kind of benefit package, what happens to the scores of unemployed
people?

A popular argument is that new jobs will be created as they always have.
Some will point to the printing press and say that it took the jobs of
scribes, but created new jobs in distribution of text. This has always
been the case indeed, but there is one key component this time around
that changes the game; software. Software has only been around for half
a century and is getting increasingly better at mimicking things that
have been distinctly human. Computer Vision, Machine Learning, Natural
Language Processing, Tactile Sensing, machines are getting better at
imitating our five senses and their power will only grow with time as
advances in processing and learning algorithms increase. I’ve worked in
the field of robotics for 2 years, I’ve seen the rapid advances
researchers are making in this field, there is no stopping the
inevitable, robots are cheaper than humans and they are better at doing
physical tasks. They will become the new labor class.

This leaves us with a need for a vigorous social safety net for people.
A basic income. When we think of basic income in a traditional sense, we
imagine a government implementing it by taxing the rich and
redistributing it to the poor. The problem with that is technology
progresses far faster than governments can adapt to change, especially
the United States government. The basic income would have to be on a
global scale, and cannot be dependent on the whims of centralized
authorities that are slow to change.

Enter SocialCoin. We need a decentralized basic income that comes in the
form of cryptocurrency. The basic idea is that 10% of the profits that
miners earn from mining this coin is pooled and distributed to every
member of the network on a bi-weekly basis. As adoption of the currency
grows, the value of the coins will increase. It doesn’t matter if
retailers don’t accept the coin, users can just exchange the coins for
bitcoins or local fiat currency for immediate real world use.

In order for SocialCoin to work, we need to figure out a way to create a
decentralized ID system that doesn’t rely on government issuance like a
Driver’s License or a Passport. This is currently an unsolved problem.
One possible way to do this is to have there be agents in the SocialCoin
Distributed Autonomous Corporations who a user would schedule
appointments with. The user would set an appointment with 3-5 agents
individually and each agent would scan the user’s irises in person to
verify that they are a real human and a unique individual who hasn’t
created an identity before. There would have to be another type of agent
in the system that browses the network for frauds. This is a very
conceptual idea, but can be the groundwork for the DAC that will
ultimately create a universal basic income for all humanity. One that
doesn’t rely on governments with their own interests to implement.

If this is implemented before the impending robotics revolution takes
all labor based jobs, it will free people from manual labor and allow
them to pursue their creative, social, and personal interests on a scale
no one has ever seen before. It will also accelerate robotics research
even further, since companies that require laborers will no longer have
them, they will truly need robots to fill those positions. We can either
wait for job loss to occur on a greater level as robots push people out
of their jobs, or we can implement the basic income first and let robots
fill in the empty spots. This is absolutely necessary and I hope someone
builds this.

[](#kudo)

164

Kudos

[](#kudo)

164

Kudos

[Read this next:\
 The Decentralized Information
Economy](http://llsourcell.svbtle.com/the-decentralized-information-economy)

Not surprisingly, yet another ‘techie’ in San Francisco was attacked by
a random person for wearing Google Glass. There’s clearly some anti-tech
sentiment simmering in some people’s minds and I can see why....
Continue…

Get updated when Siraj Ravel publishes

Don’t worry; we hate spam with a passion.\
 You can unsubscribe with one click.

qpo6xPgOmdTT0iq4xBz [Subscribe](#subscribe)

[Svbtle](https://svbtle.com)

[Siraj Ravel](http://llsourcell.svbtle.com)

[Full blog »](http://llsourcell.svbtle.com)

© 2014

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://llsourcell.svbtle.com/socialcoin-a-cryptocurrency-for-a-global-basic-income
