I was just asked to crack a program in a job interview !
--------------------------------------------------------

TL;DR

I was just asked to crack a program in a job interview. and got the job.

Hello everyone,

i am quite excited about my new blog here.I am planning to write couple
of blog posts every week.

Since the title gives you a brief information about a general concept ,
i would like to tell you my story about a job interview that was held in
Ankara,TR.

I applied a "Software Security Engineer" position and In the interview ,
they asked me really low level stuff some of which i knew , some of
which i didnot.

Then they send me an email which includes an attachment for a protected
and encrypted binary.("CRACK MEEE! ")

When i got home , i downloaded it and it only asked me a password to
unlock it.They wanted me to find that password :)

At first , it looks pretty hard but i will try to introduce the general
concept that i had followed :)

Here is the first thing i typed in the terminal

    root@lisa:~# ./CrackTheDoor 

            *** DOOR CONTROL SYSTEM  ***



    PASSWORD:

I typed something stupid keyword 3 times and it quited. :)

I have more tools to analyze.Lets get more info about the file.

    root@lisa:~# file CrackTheDoor 
    CrackTheDoor: ELF 32-bit LSB executable, Intel 80386, version 1 (SYSV), dynamically linked (uses shared libs), for GNU/Linux 2.6.15, BuildID[sha1]=0x9927be2fe310bea01d412164103b9c8b2d7567ea, not stripped
    root@lisa:~#

Ok. Now we have a little bit more info about the binary :)

Let's do this.

    root@lisa:~# ldd CrackTheDoor 
        linux-gate.so.1 =>  (0xf777b000)
        libc.so.6 => /lib32/libc.so.6 (0xf760c000)
        /lib/ld-linux.so.2 (0xf777c000)
    root@lisa:~#

Oh! just standart stuff.I will explain a bit. Linux-gate.so is something
like you cant find in your filesystem.But ldd shows that it's a shared
library right ? Yes, Have you heard about Virtual DSO (Virtual Dynamic
Shared Object)

I suggest you to read about
[linux-gate.so](http://www.trilithium.com/johan/2005/08/linux-gate/)

libc.so.6 is general c library for gnu system as you probably know.

ld-linux.so is linux's dynamic loader.

Anyway till here everything is fine.We need to run the program under the
debugger and see what happens.

    root@lisa:~# gdb CrackTheDoor 
    GNU gdb (GDB) 7.4.1-debian
    Copyright (C) 2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
    This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
    There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.  Type "show copying"
    and "show warranty" for details.
    This GDB was configured as "x86_64-linux-gnu".
    For bug reporting instructions, please see:
    <http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/bugs/>...
    Reading symbols from /root/CrackTheDoor...(no debugging symbols found)...done.
    (gdb) r
    Starting program: /root/CrackTheDoor 

    Program received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
    0x080484fb in __do_global_dtors_aux ()
    (gdb)

So , the program crashed itself.It figured out that we run it in a
debugger.Therefore , there should be some anti-debugging tricks embedded
inside the program.Ok..

Lets relaod the program and get the starting point of the program.

    root@lisa:~# gdb CrackTheDoor 
    GNU gdb (GDB) 7.4.1-debian
    Copyright (C) 2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
    This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
    There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.  Type "show copying"
    and "show warranty" for details.
    This GDB was configured as "x86_64-linux-gnu".
    For bug reporting instructions, please see:
    <http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/bugs/>...
    Reading symbols from /root/CrackTheDoor...(no debugging symbols found)...done.
    (gdb) info file
    Symbols from "/root/CrackTheDoor".
    Local exec file:
        `/root/CrackTheDoor', file type elf32-i386.
        Entry point: 0x804762c
    ...
    ...

Now we got the Entry point for the program. Let's put a breakpoint there
and start to debug the program through its entry point

    b * 0x804762c

Then press type "r" to run the program.You should be stopped at the
first line of entry point

    gdb) x/30i $pc
    => 0x804762c: pusha  
       0x804762d:   mov    $0xaa,%dl
       0x804762f:   mov    $0x8048480,%edi
       0x8047634:   mov    $0x8048cbc,%ecx
       0x8047639:   mov    %edi,0x80476f3
       0x804763f:   mov    %ecx,0x80476f7
       0x8047645:   sub    %edi,%ecx
       0x8047647:   mov    $0x804762f,%esi
       0x804764c:   push   $0x80476c1
       0x8047651:   pusha  
       0x8047652:   mov    $0x55,%al
       0x8047654:   xor    $0x99,%al
       0x8047656:   mov    $0x8047656,%edi
       0x804765b:   mov    $0x80476e5,%ecx
       0x8047660:   sub    $0x8047656,%ecx
       0x8047666:   repnz scas %es:(%edi),%al
       0x8047668:   je     0x804770a
       0x804766e:   mov    %edi,0x80476eb
       0x8047674:   popa   
       0x8047675:   add    0x80476eb,%edx
       0x804767b:   ret

It should be look like this.This syntax mode belongs to AT&T and you can
switch to Intel mode.In my opinion , Intel Syntax is a bit better

0x8047654 in this address , we first put 0x55 to al register then xor it
via 0x99 which produces 0xCC

0xCC is very important Because , It means it stops your process or like
peter said in comments it is break-to-debugger in x86 architecture.When
your debugger wants to stop your program , it swaps the bytes to 0xCC in
where it wants to stop.

0x8047666 , here we see repnz scas =\> this will search the memory
region bounded by es to edi for the value inside al ( 0xCC )

So , those lines will basically scan the memory , if there is a 0xCC ,
it will crash your program and such ...

Ok , i dont want to spend too much time here.Let's try strace.

    root@lisa:~# strace ./CrackTheDoor 
    execve("./CrackTheDoor", ["./CrackTheDoor"], [/* 17 vars */]) = 0
    [ Process PID=31085 runs in 32 bit mode. ]
    brk(0)                                  = 0x9972000
    access("/etc/ld.so.nohwcap", F_OK)      = -1 ENOENT (No such file or directory)
    mmap2(NULL, 4096, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE|MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0) = 0xfffffffff7715000
    access("/etc/ld.so.preload", R_OK)      = -1 ENOENT (No such file or directory)
    open("/etc/ld.so.cache", O_RDONLY)      = 3
    fstat64(3, {st_mode=S_IFREG|0644, st_size=35597, ...}) = 0
    mmap2(NULL, 35597, PROT_READ, MAP_PRIVATE, 3, 0) = 0xfffffffff770c000
    close(3)                                = 0
    access("/etc/ld.so.nohwcap", F_OK)      = -1 ENOENT (No such file or directory)
    open("/lib32/libc.so.6", O_RDONLY)      = 3
    read(3, "\177ELF\1\1\1\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\3\0\3\0\1\0\0\0\300o\1\0004\0\0\0"..., 512) = 512
    fstat64(3, {st_mode=S_IFREG|0755, st_size=1441884, ...}) = 0
    mmap2(NULL, 4096, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE|MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0) = 0xfffffffff770b000
    mmap2(NULL, 1456504, PROT_READ|PROT_EXEC, MAP_PRIVATE|MAP_DENYWRITE, 3, 0) = 0xfffffffff75a7000
    mprotect(0xf7704000, 4096, PROT_NONE)   = 0
    mmap2(0xf7705000, 12288, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE|MAP_FIXED|MAP_DENYWRITE, 3, 0x15d) = 0xfffffffff7705000
    mmap2(0xf7708000, 10616, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE|MAP_FIXED|MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0) = 0xfffffffff7708000
    close(3)                                = 0
    mmap2(NULL, 4096, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE|MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0) = 0xfffffffff75a6000
    set_thread_area(0xffe4d864)             = 0
    mprotect(0xf7705000, 8192, PROT_READ)   = 0
    mprotect(0x8049000, 4096, PROT_READ)    = 0
    mprotect(0xf7733000, 4096, PROT_READ)   = 0
    munmap(0xf770c000, 35597)               = 0
    ptrace(PTRACE_TRACEME, 0, 0x1, 0)       = -1 EPERM (Operation not permitted)
    ptrace(PTRACE_TRACEME, 0, 0x1, 0)       = -1 EPERM (Operation not permitted)

If you look at the last lines , the program crashed itself again.That's
because ptrace syscall.

In linux , ptrace is an abbreviation for "Process Trace".With ptrace ,
you can control another process , changing its internal state like
debuggers.

Debuggers use ptrace a lot :) it's their job.

If we imagine code , it should look like this.

    int main()
    {
        if (ptrace(PTRACE_TRACEME, 0, 1, 0) < 0) {
            printf("DEBUGGING... Bye\n");
            return 1;
        }
        printf("Hello\n");
        return 0;
    }

By the way , you can only do once ptrace[PTRACE\_TRACEMe] , so debugger
ptraced the program before, there our call will return false so we
figured out there is something out there controlling our program

We need to bypass this ptrace protection so that program shall never
understand even it is running under a debugger.

So , Our strategy will be changing result of the syscall.

Syscalls are gateways from userspace to kernelspace.We are sure that
ptrace is also using some syscalls to do process controlling thing.

We will detect when the program uses ptrace and we will set its result
to 0 :) here it is

In my home folder , i create a new .gdbinit file.Therefore , everytime i
run gdb , those configurations will be loaded automatically.

    ~/.gdbinit
    set disassembly-flavor intel # Intel syntax is better
    set disassemble-next-line on
    catch syscall ptrace #Catch the syscall.
    commands 1
    set ($eax) = 0
    continue
    end

eax will hold the result of the syscall.And it's ia always 0 or let me
say TRUE

this way , we bypass the ptrace protection and now we need to switch
back to gdb

    eren@lisa:~$ gdb ./CrackTheDoor 
    GNU gdb (GDB) 7.4.1-debian
    Copyright (C) 2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
    This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
    There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.  Type "show copying"
    and "show warranty" for details.
    This GDB was configured as "x86_64-linux-gnu".
    For bug reporting instructions, please see:
    <http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/bugs/>...
    Catchpoint 1 (syscall 'ptrace' [26])
    Reading symbols from /home/eren/CrackTheDoor...(no debugging symbols found)...done.
    (gdb) r
    Starting program: /home/eren/CrackTheDoor 

    Catchpoint 1 (call to syscall ptrace), 0x08047698 in ?? ()
    => 0x08047698:    3d 00 f0 ff ff   cmp    eax,0xfffff000

    Catchpoint 1 (returned from syscall ptrace), 0x08047698 in ?? ()
    => 0x08047698:    3d 00 f0 ff ff   cmp    eax,0xfffff000

            *** DOOR CONTROL SYSTEM  ***



    PASSWORD:

Ok , at least we can use our debugger as we want :)

i put another breakpoint here PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ

    Breakpoint 2, 0x08048534 in PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ ()
    => 0x08048534 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+0>: 1e  push   ds
    (gdb) x/40i $pc
    => 0x8048534 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ>:    push   ds
       0x8048535 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+1>:    mov    ebp,esp
       0x8048537 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+3>:    sub    esp,0x20
       0x804853a <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+6>:    mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x1],0xe4
       0x804853e <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+10>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x2],0x87
       0x8048542 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+14>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x3],0xfb
       0x8048546 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+18>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x4],0xbe
       0x804854a <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+22>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x5],0xc9
       0x804854e <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+26>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x6],0x93
       0x8048552 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+30>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x7],0x84
       0x8048556 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+34>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x8],0xfc
       0x804855a <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+38>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x9],0x8d
       0x804855e <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+42>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xa],0xe5
       0x8048562 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+46>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xb],0xbf
       0x8048566 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+50>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xc],0x5c
       0x804856a <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+54>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xd],0xe2
       0x804856e <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+58>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xe],0x76
       0x8048572 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+62>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xf],0x21
       0x8048576 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+66>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x10],0xb8
       0x804857a <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+70>:   mov    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x0
       0x8048581 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+77>:   mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x8048584 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+80>:   add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x8048587 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+83>:   movzx  eax,BYTE PTR [eax]
       0x804858a <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+86>:   test   al,al
       0x804858c <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+88>:   je     0x8048808 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+724>
       0x8048592 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+94>:   mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x8048595 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+97>:   add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x8048598 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+100>:  mov    edx,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x804859b <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+103>:  add    edx,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x804859e <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+106>:  movzx  edx,BYTE PTR [edx]
       0x80485a1 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+109>:  xor    dl,BYTE PTR [ebp-0x1]
       0x80485a4 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+112>:  mov    BYTE PTR [eax],dl
       0x80485a6 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+114>:  add    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x1
       0x80485aa <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+118>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x80485ad <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+121>:  add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x80485b0 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+124>:  movzx  eax,BYTE PTR [eax]
       0x80485b3 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+127>:  test   al,al
       0x80485b5 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+129>:  je     0x804880b <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+727>
       0x80485bb <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+135>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x80485be <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+138>:  add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x80485c1 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+141>:  mov    edx,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x80485c4 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+144>:  add    edx,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x80485c7 <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+147>:  movzx  edx,BYTE PTR [edx]
       0x80485ca <PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ+150>:  xor    dl,BYTE PTR [ebp-0x2]

Now this part is interesting

i see some constants moving somewhere and the inputs i gave to program
xored with those constants

i continued to investigate more..

    (gdb) x/30i X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2
       0x8048838 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2>:  sbb    ecx,DWORD PTR [ecx+0x20ec83e5]
       0x804883e <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+6>:    mov    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x18],0x0
       0x8048845 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+13>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x1],0xd9
       0x8048849 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+17>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x2],0xcd
       0x804884d <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+21>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x3],0xc9
       0x8048851 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+25>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x4],0xe5
       0x8048855 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+29>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x5],0x9e
       0x8048859 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+33>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x6],0xd0
       0x804885d <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+37>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x7],0xe8
       0x8048861 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+41>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x8],0xa5
       0x8048865 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+45>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x9],0xaf
       0x8048869 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+49>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xa],0x87
       0x804886d <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+53>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xb],0xd2
       0x8048871 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+57>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xc],0x79
       0x8048875 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+61>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xd],0xa9
       0x8048879 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+65>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xe],0x5d
       0x804887d <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+69>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0xf],0x7
       0x8048881 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+73>:   mov    BYTE PTR [ebp-0x10],0x81
       0x8048885 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+77>:   mov    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x0
       0x804888c <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+84>:   mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x804888f <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+87>:   add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x8048892 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+90>:   movzx  eax,BYTE PTR [eax]
       0x8048895 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+93>:   cmp    al,BYTE PTR [ebp-0x1]
       0x8048898 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+96>:   je     0x80488a2 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+106>
       0x804889a <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+98>:   mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x18]

This is also similar :) Now we pushing another bunch of constants....

Ok here's the remaining part of the function

    0x804889d <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+101>:    jmp    0x8048a20 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+488>
       0x80488a2 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+106>:  add    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x1
       0x80488a6 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+110>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x80488a9 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+113>:  add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x80488ac <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+116>:  movzx  eax,BYTE PTR [eax]
       0x80488af <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+119>:  cmp    al,BYTE PTR [ebp-0x2]
       0x80488b2 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+122>:  je     0x80488bc <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+132>
       0x80488b4 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+124>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x18]
       0x80488b7 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+127>:  jmp    0x8048a20 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+488>
       0x80488bc <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+132>:  add    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x1
       0x80488c0 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+136>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x80488c3 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+139>:  add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x80488c6 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+142>:  movzx  eax,BYTE PTR [eax]
       0x80488c9 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+145>:  cmp    al,BYTE PTR [ebp-0x3]
       0x80488cc <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+148>:  je     0x80488d6 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+158>
       0x80488ce <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+150>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x18]
       0x80488d1 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+153>:  jmp    0x8048a20 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+488>
       0x80488d6 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+158>:  add    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x1
       0x80488da <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+162>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x80488dd <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+165>:  add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
    ---Type <return> to continue, or q <return> to quit---
       0x80488e0 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+168>:  movzx  eax,BYTE PTR [eax]
       0x80488e3 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+171>:  cmp    al,BYTE PTR [ebp-0x4]
       0x80488e6 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+174>:  je     0x80488f0 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+184>
       0x80488e8 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+176>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x18]
       0x80488eb <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+179>:  jmp    0x8048a20 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+488>
       0x80488f0 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+184>:  add    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x1
       0x80488f4 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+188>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]
       0x80488f7 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+191>:  add    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp+0x8]
       0x80488fa <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+194>:  movzx  eax,BYTE PTR [eax]
       0x80488fd <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+197>:  cmp    al,BYTE PTR [ebp-0x5]
       0x8048900 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+200>:  je     0x804890a <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+210>
       0x8048902 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+202>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x18]
       0x8048905 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+205>:  jmp    0x8048a20 <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+488>
       0x804890a <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+210>:  add    DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14],0x1
       0x804890e <X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2+214>:  mov    eax,DWORD PTR [ebp-0x14]

Do you see the pattern that i see here ? If you dont, no problem..

Here , the program compares the my xored inputs with the constants
again.

Now , we look at the inputs again , first inputs were xored with some
constants and outputs compared with other constants

So last 2 functions should be like this.

    void PJeGPC4TIVaKFmmy53DJ (int * p)
    {
      int array[] = {0xe4,0x87,0xfb,0xbe,0xc9,0x93,0x84,0xfc,0x8d,0xe5,0xbf,0x5c,0xe2,0x76,0x21,0xb8}
      for(i=0;i<16;i++)
     {
        p[i] = p[i] ^ array[i]
     }
    }

    int X1bdrhN8Yk9NZ59Vb7P2(int * p)
    {
       int array = {0xd9,0xcd,0xc9,0xe5,0x9e,0xd0,0xe8,0xa5,0xaf,0x87,0xd2,0x79,0xa9,0x5d,0x7,0x81}
       for(i=0;i<16;i++)
     {
        if(p[i] != array[i])
             return false; // fail..
     }
      return true 
    }

So write up a simple python script to xor those two constants to find
the key

    #!/usr/bin/python
    firstConst = [0xe4,0x87,0xfb,0xbe,0xc9,0x93,0x84,0xfc,0x8d,0xe5,0xbf,0x5c,0xe2,0x76,0x21,0xb8]
    secondConst = [0xd9,0xcd,0xc9,0xe5,0x9e,0xd0,0xe8,0xa5,0xaf,0x87,0xd2,0x79,0xa9,0x5d,0x7,0x81]
    ret =""
    for x in range(16):
            ret+=chr(firstConst[x] ^ secondConst[x])
    print ret

    eren@lisa:~$ ./CrackTheDoor 

            *** DOOR CONTROL SYSTEM  ***



    PASSWORD: =J2[WClY"bm%K+&9

            ***  ACCESS GRANTED  ***

            ***  THE DOOR OPENED ***

Et voilà!

I'll write another to post to cover Part 2 :)

The company send me another crack me for round 2 :) That's also
interesting..

(BTW i got the job :) ).

If you want to try it yourself , send me an email for binary.

(You can also poke me for typos )

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

17 Sep 2014

[« Return to the home page](/)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://erenyagdiran.github.io/I-was-just-asked-to-crack-a-program-Part-1/
