\
[Subscribe Now to Our Free Email
Newsletter](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/newsletter/)

#### 

[](http://www.impactlab.net)
============================

[![DaVinci
Coders](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/DaVinciCodersAd_horizontal.png)](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/plugins/wp-adserve/adclick.php?id=352)

-   [Home](http://www.impactlab.com/)
-   [DaVinci Institute](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/)
-   [DaVinci Speakers](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/speakers.php)
-   [DaVinci Papers](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/papers.php)
-   [DaVinci Events](https://www.davinciinstitute.com/calendar.php)
-   [About](http://www.impactlab.net/about/)
-   [Impact Lab Advertising Rate
    Sheet](http://www.impactlab.net/impact-lab-advertising-rate-sheet/)
-   [Product Review Submission
    Guidelines](http://www.impactlab.net/product-review-submission-guidelines/)

September 24th, 2014 at 10:10 am

[A new discovery about prime numbers and what it means for the future of math](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/ "Permanent Link to A new discovery about prime numbers and what it means for the future of math")
==================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

in:
[Analysis](http://www.impactlab.net/category/analysis/ "View all posts in Analysis"),[New
Discoveries](http://www.impactlab.net/category/new-discoveries/ "View all posts in New Discoveries"),[People
Making a
Difference](http://www.impactlab.net/category/people-making-a-difference/ "View all posts in People Making a Difference"),[Science
& Technology
News](http://www.impactlab.net/category/science-technology-news/ "View all posts in Science & Technology News")

[](http://twitter.com/share)

[](http://pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?url=http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/&media=http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/numbers.jpg)

[![numbers](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/numbers.jpg)](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/numbers.jpg)

**Physicist Ed Copeland explains Yitang Zhang’s finding on bounded gaps
between prime numbers.**

Yitang “Tom” Zhang, a popular math professor at the University of New
Hampshire, stunned the world of pure mathematics this month when he
announced that he had proven the “bounded gaps” conjecture about the
distribution of prime numbers. This is a crucial milestone on the way to
the even more elusive twin primes conjecture, and a major achievement in
itself.

The stereotype, outmoded though it is, is that new mathematical
discoveries emerge from the minds of dewy young geniuses. But Zhang is
over 50. What’s more, he hasn’t published a paper since 2001. Some of
the world’s most prominent number theorists have been hammering on the
bounded gaps problem for decades now, so the sudden resolution of the
problem by a seemingly inactive mathematician far from the action at
Harvard, Princeton, and Stanford came as a tremendous surprise.

But the fact that the conjecture is *true* was no surprise at all.
Mathematicians have a reputation of being no-bullshit hard cases who
don’t believe a thing until it’s locked down and proved. That’s not
quite true. All of us believed the bounded gaps conjecture before
Zhang’s big reveal, and we all believe the twin primes conjecture even
though it remains unproven. Why?

Let’s start with what the conjectures say. The prime numbers are those
numbers greater than 1 that aren’t multiples of any number smaller than
themselves and greater than 1; so 7 is a prime, but 9 is not, because
it’s divisible by 3. The first few primes are: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13 …

[![IL-Header-Communicating-with-the-Future](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/IL-Header-Communicating-with-the-Future.png "IL-Header-Communicating-with-the-Future")](http://www.amazon.com/Communicating-Future-Re-engineering-Intentions-Master/dp/098384710X/ref=sr_1_2?)

Every positive number can be expressed in just one way as a product of
prime numbers. For instance, 60 is made up of two 2s, one 3, and one 5.
(This is why we don’t take 1 to be a prime, though some mathematicians
have done so in the past; it breaks the uniqueness, because if 1 counts
as prime, 60 could be written as 2 x 2 x 3 x 5 and 1 x 2 x 2 x 3 x 5 and
1 x 1 x 2 x 2 x 3 x 5 …)

The primes are the atoms of number theory, the basic indivisible
entities of which all numbers are made. As such, they’ve been the object
of intense study ever since number theory started. One of the very first
theorems in number theory is that of Euclid, which tells us that the
primes are infinite in number; we will never run out, no matter how far
along the number line we let our minds range.

But mathematicians are greedy types, not inclined to be satisfied with
mere assertion of infinitude. After all, there’s infinite and then
there’s *infinite*. There are infinitely many powers of 2, but they’re
very rare. Among the first 1,000 numbers, there are only 10 powers of 2:
1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512.

There are infinitely many even numbers, too, but they’re much more
common: exactly 500 out of the first 1,000. In fact, it’s pretty
apparent that out of the first X numbers, just about (1/2)X will be
even.

Primes, it turns out, are intermediate—more common than the powers of 2
but rarer than even numbers. Among the first X numbers, about X/log(X)
are prime; this is thePrime Number Theorem, proven at the end of the
19^th^ century by Hadamard and de la Vallée Poussin. This means, in
particular, that prime numbers get less and less common as the numbers
get bigger, though the decrease is very slow; a random number with 20
digits is half as likely to be prime as a random number with 10 digits.

Naturally, one imagines that the more common a certain type of number,
the smaller the gaps between instances of that type of number. If you’re
looking at an even number, you never have to travel farther than 2
numbers forward to encounter the next even; in fact, the gaps between
the even numbers are always *exactly* of size 2. For the powers of 2,
it’s a different story. The gaps between successive powers of 2 grow
exponentially, and there are finitely many gaps of any given size; once
you get past 16, for instance, you will never again see two powers of 2
separated by a gap of size 15 or less.

Those two problems are easy, but the question of gaps between
consecutive primes is harder. It’s so hard that, even after Zhang’s
breakthrough, it remains a mystery in many respects.

And yet we think we know what to expect, thanks to a remarkably fruitful
point of view—we think of primes as *random numbers*. The reason the
fruitfulness of this viewpoint is so remarkable is that the viewpoint is
so very, very false. Primes are not random! Nothing about them is
arbitrary or subject to chance. Quite the opposite—we take them as
immutable features of the universe, and carve them on the golden records
we shoot out into interstellar space to prove to the ETs that we’re no
dopes.

If you start thinking really hard about what “random” *really* means,
first you get a little nauseated, and a little after that you find
you’re doing analytic philosophy. So let’s not go down that road.

Instead, take the mathematician’s path. The primes are not random, but
it turns out that in many ways they *act as if they were*. For example,
when you divide a random number by 3, the remainder is either 0, 1, or
2, and each case arises equally often. When you divide a big prime
number by 3, the quotient can’t come out even; otherwise, the so-called
prime would be divisible by 3, which would mean it wasn’t really a prime
at all. But an old theorem of Dirichlet tells us that remainder 1 shows
up about equally often as remainder 2, just as is the case for random
numbers. So as far as “remainder modulo 3” goes, prime numbers, apart
from not being multiples of 3, look random.

What about the gaps between consecutive primes? You might think that,
because prime numbers get rarer and rarer as numbers get bigger, that
they also get farther and farther apart. On average, that’s indeed the
case. But what Yitang Zhang just proved is that there are infinitely
many pairs of primes that differ by at most 70,000,000. In other words,
that the gap between one prime and the next is bounded by 70,000,000
infinitely often—thus, the “bounded gaps” conjecture.

On first glance, this might seem a miraculous phenomenon. If the primes
are tending to be farther and farther apart, what’s causing there to be
so many pairs that are close together? Is it some kind of prime gravity?

Nothing of the kind. If you strew numbers at random, it’s very likely
that some pairs will, by chance, land very close together. (The
left-hand picture on this page is a nice illustration of how this works
in the plane; the points are chosen independently and completely
randomly, but you see some clumps and clusters all the same.)

It’s not hard to compute that, if prime numbers behaved like random
numbers, you’d see precisely the behavior that Zhang demonstrated. Even
more: You’d expect to see infinitely many pairs of primes that are
separated by only 2, as the twin primes conjecture claims.

(The one computation in this article follows. If you’re not onboard,
avert your eyes and rejoin the text where it says “And a lot of twin
primes …”)

Among the first N numbers, about N/log N of them are primes. If these
were distributed randomly, each number n would have a 1/log N chance of
being prime. The chance that n and n+2 are *both* prime should thus be
about (1/log N)\^2. So how many pairs of primes separated by 2 should we
expect to see? There are about N pairs (n, n+2) in the range of
interest, and each one has a (1/log N)\^2 chance of being a twin prime,
so one should expect to find about N/(log N)\^2 twin primes in the
interval.

There are some deviations from pure randomness whose small effects
number theorists know how to handle; a more refined analysis taking
these into account suggests that the number of twin primes should in
fact be about 32 percent greater than N/(log N)\^2. This better
approximation gives a prediction that the number of twin primes less
than a quadrillion should be about 1.1 trillion; the actual figure is
1,177,209,242,304. That’s a lot of twin primes.

And a lot of twin primes is exactly what number theorists expect to find
no matter how big the numbers get—not because we think there’s a deep,
miraculous structure hidden in the primes, but *precisely because we
don’t think so*. We expect the primes to be tossed around at random like
dirt. If the twin primes conjecture were false, *that* would be a
miracle, requiring that some hitherto unknown force be pushing the
primes apart.

Not to pull back the curtain too much, but a lot of famous conjectures
in number theory are like this. The Goldbach conjecture that every even
number is the sum of two primes? The ABC conjecture, for which Shin
Mochizuki controversially claimed a proof last fall? The conjecture that
the primes contain arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions, whose
resolution by Ben Green and Terry Tao in 2004 helped win Tao a Fields
Medal? All are immensely difficult, but they are all exactly what one is
guided to believe by the example of random numbers.

It’s one thing to know what to expect and quite another to prove one’s
expectation is correct. Despite the apparent simplicity of the bounded
gaps conjecture, Zhang’s proof requires some of the deepest theorems of
modern mathematics, like Pierre Deligne’s results relating averages of
number-theoretic functions with the geometry of high-dimensional spaces.
(More classically minded analytic number theorists are already wondering
whether Zhang’s proof can be modified to avoid such abstruse stuff.)

Building on the work of many predecessors, Zhang is able to show in a
rather precise sense that the prime numbers look random in the first way
we mentioned, concerning the remainders obtained after division by many
different integers. From this (following a path laid out by Goldston,
Pintz, and Yıldırım, the last people to make any progress on prime gaps)
he can show that the prime numbers look random in a totally different
sense, having to do with the sizes of the gaps between them. Random is
random!

Zhang’s success (along with the work of Green and Tao) points to a
prospect even more exciting than any individual result about primes—that
we might, in the end, be on our way to developing a richer theory of
randomness. How wonderfully paradoxical: What helps us break down the
final mysteries about prime numbers may be new mathematical ideas that
structure the concept of structurelessness itself.

Photo credit:
[CNet](http://www.cnet.com/news/yitang-zhang-a-prime-number-proof-and-a-world-of-persistence/)

Via
[Slate](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/do_the_math/2013/05/yitang_zhang_twin_primes_conjecture_a_huge_discovery_about_prime_numbers.html?wpsrc=sh_all_tab_tw_ru)

[Share This](#)\

[Subscribe](http://www.impactlab.net/feed/ "Subscribe to RSS")[del.icio.us](http://del.icio.us/post?url=http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/&title=A+new+discovery+about+prime+numbers+and+what+it+means+for+the+future+of+math "Add to del.icio.us")[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/ "Share on Facebook")[Reddit](http://reddit.com/submit?url=http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/&title=A+new+discovery+about+prime+numbers+and+what+it+means+for+the+future+of+math "Add to Reddit")[StumbleUpon](http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url=http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/&title=A+new+discovery+about+prime+numbers+and+what+it+means+for+the+future+of+math "Add to StumbleUpon")[Technorati](http://technorati.com/faves?add=http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/ "Add to Technorati")

[![IL-Header-Communicating-with-the-Future](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/IL-Header-Communicating-with-the-Future.png "IL-Header-Communicating-with-the-Future")](http://www.amazon.com/Communicating-Future-Re-engineering-Intentions-Master/dp/098384710X/ref=sr_1_2?)

Comments are closed.

[![DaVinci
Coders](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Impact-Lab-Block-Coder-Ad-32.jpg)](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/plugins/wp-adserve/adclick.php?id=378)

-   [![DaVinci
    Coders](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Impact-Lab-Tower-Power-of-Code-1.jpg)](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-content/plugins/wp-adserve/adclick.php?id=360)
-   Tags
    ----

    [amazing](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/amazing/ "300 topics")
    [Animals](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/animals/ "291 topics")
    [Art](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/art/ "354 topics")
    [Brain](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/brain/ "532 topics")
    [Business](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/business/ "540 topics")
    [car](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/car/ "228 topics")
    [Children](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/children/ "323 topics")
    [China](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/china/ "367 topics")
    [Computer](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/computer/ "323 topics")
    [Economy](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/economy/ "482 topics")
    [Education](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/education/ "406 topics")
    [energy](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/energy/ "401 topics")
    [Food](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/food/ "389 topics")
    [funny](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/funny/ "317 topics")
    [future](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/future/ "1,040 topics")
    [global](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/global/ "239 topics")
    [google](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/google/ "284 topics")
    [government](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/government/ "290 topics")
    [Health](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/health/ "917 topics")
    [Humor](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/humor/ "373 topics")
    [Internet](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/internet/ "741 topics")
    [jobs](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/jobs/ "226 topics")
    [joke](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/joke/ "297 topics")
    [medical](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/medical/ "265 topics")
    [money](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/money/ "354 topics")
    [NASA](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/nasa/ "249 topics")
    [online](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/online/ "257 topics")
    [photo](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/photo/ "311 topics")
    [photography](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/photography/ "259 topics")
    [photos](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/photos/ "531 topics")
    [Power](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/power/ "247 topics")
    [robot](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/robot/ "257 topics")
    [Science](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/science/ "500 topics")
    [solar](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/solar/ "215 topics")
    [Space](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/space/ "289 topics")
    [study](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/study/ "966 topics")
    [Technology](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/technology/ "2,630 topics")
    [Thomas
    Frey](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/thomas-frey/ "312 topics") [top
    10](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/top-10/ "358 topics") [Top 10
    Photos of the
    Week](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/top-10-photos-of-the-week/ "279 topics")
    [Trend](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/trend/ "913 topics")
    [trends](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/trends/ "354 topics")
    [video](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/video/ "865 topics")
    [Water](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/water/ "250 topics")
    [Women](http://www.impactlab.net/tag/women/ "295 topics")

-   [![RSS](http://www.impactlab.net/wp-includes/images/rss.png)](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/feed/ "Syndicate this content") [Recent Posts on FuturistSpeaker.com](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/ "Challenging your thinking, pushing your imagination, creating the future")
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    -   [Should Robots Have Their Own Bank
        Accounts?](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/09/should-robots-have-their-own-bank-accounts/ "Typical house-bot shopping on a budget The year is 2027 and Winston, a newly born house-bot charged with doing a number of domestic chores including cleaning, meal prep, laundry, and building maintenance, has been programmed to not only perform the work, but also restock supplies once they reach a certain level. Owners have wide latitude [...]")
        September 22, 2014
    -   [Seven Reasons Why the Value of Human Life is Increasing
        Exponentially](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/09/seven-reasons-why-the-value-of-human-life-is-increasing-exponentially/ "What’s the value of a human life? For some of you this is a very disconcerting question because it attempts to put a dollar value on a person, something we value in far different ways. But that is exactly what governments and businesses find themselves doing on a daily basis. Every time an insurance company [...]")
        September 15, 2014
    -   [192 Future Uses for Flying
        Drones](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/09/192-future-uses-for-flying-drones/ "The thought occurred to me that mounting a video projector to a flying drone could give it unusual capabilities.  My first idea was to use it for special effects at a concert or major indoor event. But a device like this could also be used for spot advertising – creating momentary images on the sidewalk [...]")
        September 2, 2014
    -   [When it comes to jobs, why is this time
        different?](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/08/when-it-comes-to-jobs-why-is-this-time-different/ "In 1964, and open letter was drafted and sent to President Johnson, warning him of the coming Triple Revolution. The letter was composed and signed by 35 members of the “Ad Hoc Committee on the Triple Revolution,” which include luminaries like Nobel Chemist, Linus Pauling; civil rights activist, Tom Hayden; and Swedish Nobel Economist, Gunnar [...]")
        August 26, 2014
    -   [Establishing the Central Bank of
        Bitcoin](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/08/establishing-the-central-bank-of-bitcoin/ "The year is 2024. It seemed like a piece of nostalgia to open a new bank account and get a free toaster, but this wasn’t any ordinary toaster, and it certainly wasn’t any ordinary bank. The new Internet of Things Toaster was one of the coolest gadgets of all times, and the Global Bank of [...]")
        August 17, 2014
    -   [The Future Library – A Liquid Network for
        Ideas](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/08/the-future-library-a-liquid-network-for-ideas/ "At a recent conference on the “Future of Libraries” put together by the American Library Association at the Library of Congress in Washington DC, I proposed a rather unusual mission for libraries, that of becoming “liquid networks” for our ideas. Unlike our not-so-distant-past, the world’s most important information is no longer solely in books. Whenever [...]")
        August 12, 2014
    -   [2050 and the Future of
        Infrastructure](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/08/2050-and-the-future-of-infrastructure/ "Much of the world around us has been formed around key pieces of infrastructure. Most see this as a testament to who we are as a society, and part of the cultural moorings we need to guide us into the future. In general, infrastructure represents a long-term societal investment that will move us along the [...]")
        August 4, 2014
    -   [All Information, Ever Created, is Still in
        Existence](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/07/all-information-ever-created-is-still-in-existence/ "The date is July 14, 1986. Herbert Benson wakes up early, goes down to the kitchen and makes himself a peanut butter sandwich. This is a seemingly trivial incident that happened nearly 30 years ago. How do we know today that this sandwich-making incident actually happened? Is there any kind of time-space record of it? Making [...]")
        July 28, 2014
    -   [When Everyone Becomes
        Blackmailable](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/07/when-everyone-becomes-blackmailable/ "On a recent driving trip, my wife and I became immersed in the audio version of one of Tom Clancy’s last novels titled, “Threat Vector.” Without giving away too much of the plot, a Chinese super-geek villain has hatched a plan to hack into our most secure networks and blackmail people with their darkest secrets [...]")
        July 20, 2014
    -   [The Laws of Exponential
        Capabilities](http://www.futuristspeaker.com/2014/07/the-laws-of-exponential-capabilities/ "When people like Google CEO, Larry Page, Virgin’s Richard Branson, and X-Prize Foundation CEO, Peter Diamandis, talk about us entering into a period of abundance, there has been a natural tendency to assume we’ll be entering into a life of leisure. People won’t have to work as hard and we will all have more time [...]")
        July 14, 2014

-   Recent Posts
    ------------

    -   [Ello – a wakeup call for social media
        marketing](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/30/ello-a-wakeup-call-for-social-media-marketing/)
    -   [New fuel cell system will heat and power homes using natural
        gas](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/30/new-fuel-cell-system-will-heat-and-power-homes-using-natural-gas/)
    -   [iPhone manufacturer Foxconn invests $811M in building electric
        cars in
        China](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/30/iphone-manufacturer-foxconn-invests-811m-in-building-electric-cars-in-china/)
    -   [Panther Vision Powercap – a solar-powered flashlight you wear
        on your
        head](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/30/panther-vision-powercap-a-solar-powered-flashlight-you-wear-on-your-head/)
    -   [Accept Uber-style disruption or face unemployment: Eric Schmidt
        to the European
        Union](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/30/accept-uber-style-disruption-or-face-unemployment-eric-schmidt-to-the-european-union/)
    -   [Japanese company Obayashi plans to have a space elevator up and
        running by
        2050](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/29/japanese-company-obayashi-plans-to-have-a-space-elevator-up-and-running-by-2050/)
    -   [We are headed into an era of unlimited and free clean
        energy](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/29/we-are-headed-into-an-era-of-unlimited-and-free-clean-energy/)
    -   [The future is coming to
        space](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/29/the-future-is-coming-to-space/)
    -   [Progress in technology is driven by our growing addiction to
        ‘cognitive
        ecstasy’](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/29/progress-in-technology-is-driven-by-our-growing-addiction-to-cognitive-ecstasy/)
    -   [There’s a shortage of software developers – tell your kids to
        become
        coders](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/29/theres-a-shortage-of-software-developers-tell-your-kids-to-become-coders/)
    -   [Peering into the future of AI and robot
        brains](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/28/peering-into-the-future-of-ai-and-robot-brains/)
    -   [Scientists create ultra-thin ‘diamond nanothreads,’ world’s
        strongest
        material](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/28/scientists-create-ultra-thin-diamond-nanothreads-worlds-strongest-material/)
    -   [Artificial intelligence is the key to unlocking big
        data](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/27/artificial-intelligence-is-the-key-to-unlocking-big-data/)
    -   [Virtual reality technology is the future of
        work](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/27/virtual-reality-technology-is-the-future-of-work/)
    -   [Yossarian – a search engine that can make you more
        creative](http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/26/yossarian-a-search-engine-that-can-make-you-more-creative/)

-   Upcoming Events at the DaVinci Institute
    ----------------------------------------

    -   **Sat (10/ 4)** - [Breaking Into the Game Development Industry
        Boot Camp - How games are made and why they
        matter](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/events/719/breaking-into-the-game-development-industry-boot-camp-saturday-october--4-2014)
    -   **Tue (10/ 7)** - [The Future of
        Cryptocurrencies](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/events/714/the-future-of-cryptocurrencies-tuesday-october--7-2014)
    -   **Sat (10/18)** - [Inventor Boot Camp 2014 - A Method to the
        Madness - Turning Your Ideas Into Profitable
        Products](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/events/713/inventor-boot-camp-2014-saturday-october-18-2014)
    -   **Tue (10/21)** - [Creating Money-Making Certification Programs
        - How to Turn Your Wisdom and Expertise into Money-Making
        Certification
        Programs](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/events/712/creating-moneymaking-certification-programs-tuesday-october-21-2014)
    -   **Sat (11/15)** - [DaVinci Inventor Showcase - 2014 - "Meet the
        Inventors, Meet the
        Future"](http://www.davinciinstitute.com/events/717/davinci-inventor-showcase--2014-saturday-november-15-2014)
    -   **[MORE EVENTS](https://www.davinciinstitute.com/events)**

-   About
    -----

    \
    \
     Impact Lab is owned and operated by Impact Lab LLC. \
    \

-   Categories
    ----------

    -   [3D
        Printer](http://www.impactlab.net/category/3d-printer-2/ "View all posts filed under 3D Printer")
    -   [Agriculture](http://www.impactlab.net/category/agriculture-2/ "View all posts filed under Agriculture")
    -   [Alternative
        Transportation](http://www.impactlab.net/category/alternative-transportation/ "View all posts filed under Alternative Transportation")
    -   [Analysis](http://www.impactlab.net/category/analysis/ "View all posts filed under Analysis")
    -   [Animals](http://www.impactlab.net/category/animals/ "View all posts filed under Animals")
    -   [App](http://www.impactlab.net/category/app/ "View all posts filed under App")
    -   [Architecture](http://www.impactlab.net/category/architecture/ "View all posts filed under Architecture")
    -   [Art](http://www.impactlab.net/category/art/ "View all posts filed under Art")
    -   [Award
        Winner](http://www.impactlab.net/category/award-winner/ "View all posts filed under Award Winner")
    -   [Baby
        Gadgets](http://www.impactlab.net/category/baby-gadgets/ "View all posts filed under Baby Gadgets")
    -   [bicycle](http://www.impactlab.net/category/bicycle/ "View all posts filed under bicycle")
    -   [Big
        Problems](http://www.impactlab.net/category/big-problems/ "View all posts filed under Big Problems")
    -   [Birth](http://www.impactlab.net/category/birth/ "View all posts filed under Birth")
    -   [Brain](http://www.impactlab.net/category/brain/ "View all posts filed under Brain")
    -   [Breakthrough
        Thinking](http://www.impactlab.net/category/breakthrough-thinking/ "View all posts filed under Breakthrough Thinking")
    -   [Business](http://www.impactlab.net/category/business/ "View all posts filed under Business")
    -   [Corporate
        Manipulation](http://www.impactlab.net/category/corporate-manipulation/ "View all posts filed under Corporate Manipulation")
    -   [Crazy
        Photos](http://www.impactlab.net/category/crazy-photos/ "View all posts filed under Crazy Photos")
    -   [Crazy
        Stuff](http://www.impactlab.net/category/crazy-stuff/ "View all posts filed under Crazy Stuff")
    -   [Culture](http://www.impactlab.net/category/culture/ "View all posts filed under Culture")
    -   [Current
        Events](http://www.impactlab.net/category/current-events/ "View all posts filed under Current Events")
    -   [DIY](http://www.impactlab.net/category/diy/ "View all posts filed under DIY")
    -   [Drones](http://www.impactlab.net/category/drones-2/ "View all posts filed under Drones")
    -   [Ecological
        Products](http://www.impactlab.net/category/ecological-products/ "View all posts filed under Ecological Products")
    -   [Economy](http://www.impactlab.net/category/economy/ "View all posts filed under Economy")
    -   [Education](http://www.impactlab.net/category/education/ "View all posts filed under Education")
    -   [Energy](http://www.impactlab.net/category/energy-2/ "View all posts filed under Energy")
    -   [Entertainment](http://www.impactlab.net/category/entertainment/ "View all posts filed under Entertainment")
    -   [Environment](http://www.impactlab.net/category/environment-2/ "View all posts filed under Environment")
    -   [facebook](http://www.impactlab.net/category/facebook/ "View all posts filed under facebook")
    -   [Famous
        Inventor](http://www.impactlab.net/category/famous-inventor/ "View all posts filed under Famous Inventor")
    -   [Fashion](http://www.impactlab.net/category/fashion/ "View all posts filed under Fashion")
    -   [Food](http://www.impactlab.net/category/food/ "View all posts filed under Food")
    -   [Games](http://www.impactlab.net/category/games/ "View all posts filed under Games")
    -   [Global
        Warming](http://www.impactlab.net/category/global-warming/ "View all posts filed under Global Warming")
    -   [Globalism](http://www.impactlab.net/category/globalism/ "View all posts filed under Globalism")
    -   [government](http://www.impactlab.net/category/government/ "View all posts filed under government")
    -   [Great New
        Product](http://www.impactlab.net/category/great-new-product/ "View all posts filed under Great New Product")
    -   [Great
        Videos](http://www.impactlab.net/category/great-videos/ "View all posts filed under Great Videos")
    -   [Green
        Friendly](http://www.impactlab.net/category/green-friendly/ "View all posts filed under Green Friendly")
    -   [Health &
        Fitness](http://www.impactlab.net/category/health-fitness/ "View all posts filed under Health & Fitness")
    -   [Historical
        Perspectives](http://www.impactlab.net/category/historical-perspectives/ "View all posts filed under Historical Perspectives")
    -   [Hot
        Issues](http://www.impactlab.net/category/hot-issues/ "View all posts filed under Hot Issues")
    -   [Human
        Behavior](http://www.impactlab.net/category/human-behavior/ "View all posts filed under Human Behavior")
    -   [Humor](http://www.impactlab.net/category/humor/ "View all posts filed under Humor")
    -   [Insects](http://www.impactlab.net/category/insects/ "View all posts filed under Insects")
    -   [Internet](http://www.impactlab.net/category/internet/ "View all posts filed under Internet")
    -   [Latest
        News](http://www.impactlab.net/category/latest-news/ "View all posts filed under Latest News")
    -   [Latest
        Trend](http://www.impactlab.net/category/latest-trend/ "View all posts filed under Latest Trend")
    -   [Medical
        Breakthrough](http://www.impactlab.net/category/medical-breakthrough/ "View all posts filed under Medical Breakthrough")
    -   [Money
        Talk](http://www.impactlab.net/category/money-talk/ "View all posts filed under Money Talk")
    -   [Music](http://www.impactlab.net/category/music/ "View all posts filed under Music")
    -   [Nanotechnology](http://www.impactlab.net/category/nanotechnology/ "View all posts filed under Nanotechnology")
    -   [New
        Discoveries](http://www.impactlab.net/category/new-discoveries/ "View all posts filed under New Discoveries")
    -   [New
        Inventions](http://www.impactlab.net/category/new-inventions/ "View all posts filed under New Inventions")
    -   [New
        Viewpoints](http://www.impactlab.net/category/new-viewpoints/ "View all posts filed under New Viewpoints")
    -   [People Making a
        Difference](http://www.impactlab.net/category/people-making-a-difference/ "View all posts filed under People Making a Difference")
    -   [Photo
        Perspectives](http://www.impactlab.net/category/photo-perspectives/ "View all posts filed under Photo Perspectives")
    -   [Plant
        Life](http://www.impactlab.net/category/plant-life/ "View all posts filed under Plant Life")
    -   [Record
        Breaker](http://www.impactlab.net/category/record-breaker/ "View all posts filed under Record Breaker")
    -   [Recycling](http://www.impactlab.net/category/recycling/ "View all posts filed under Recycling")
    -   [Report](http://www.impactlab.net/category/report/ "View all posts filed under Report")
    -   [Robots](http://www.impactlab.net/category/robots/ "View all posts filed under Robots")
    -   [Science & Technology
        News](http://www.impactlab.net/category/science-technology-news/ "View all posts filed under Science & Technology News")
    -   [Sealife](http://www.impactlab.net/category/sealife/ "View all posts filed under Sealife")
    -   [Social
        Media](http://www.impactlab.net/category/social-media/ "View all posts filed under Social Media")
    -   [Solar
        Power](http://www.impactlab.net/category/solar-power/ "View all posts filed under Solar Power")
    -   [Space](http://www.impactlab.net/category/space/ "View all posts filed under Space")
    -   [Spirituality](http://www.impactlab.net/category/spirituality/ "View all posts filed under Spirituality")
    -   [sports](http://www.impactlab.net/category/sports/ "View all posts filed under sports")
    -   [Star
        Trek](http://www.impactlab.net/category/star-trek/ "View all posts filed under Star Trek")
    -   [Star
        Wars](http://www.impactlab.net/category/star-wars/ "View all posts filed under Star Wars")
    -   [top
        10](http://www.impactlab.net/category/top-10/ "View all posts filed under top 10")
    -   [Twitter](http://www.impactlab.net/category/twitter/ "View all posts filed under Twitter")
    -   [Uncategorized](http://www.impactlab.net/category/uncategorized/ "View all posts filed under Uncategorized")
    -   [Upcoming
        Events](http://www.impactlab.net/category/upcoming-events/ "View all posts filed under Upcoming Events")
    -   [Video
        Games](http://www.impactlab.net/category/video-games/ "View all posts filed under Video Games")
    -   [Weapons](http://www.impactlab.net/category/weapons/ "View all posts filed under Weapons")
    -   [Weather](http://www.impactlab.net/category/weather/ "View all posts filed under Weather")
    -   [Wind
        Power](http://www.impactlab.net/category/wind-power/ "View all posts filed under Wind Power")

[Impact Lab](http://www.impactlab.net) is proudly powered by
[WordPress](http://wordpress.org/) • [Entries
(RSS)](http://www.impactlab.net/feed/) and [Comments
(RSS)](http://www.impactlab.net/comments/feed/). • [xMark
Theme](http://blogdesignsolutions.com) by: [Lisa
Sabin-Wilson](http://justagirlintheworld.com)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.impactlab.net/2014/09/24/a-new-discovery-about-prime-numbers-and-what-it-means-for-the-future-of-math/
