tadhg.com

[](/wp/)

tadhg.com

-   [Writing](/wp/tag/writing)
    -   [Fiction](/wp/fiction)
    -   [Microfiction](/wp/tag/microfiction)
    -   [Poetry](/wp/tag/poetry)
    -   [Reviews](/wp/tag/reviews)
    -   [Politics](/wp/tag/politics)
    -   [Technology](/wp/tag/tech)
    -   [AFBH](/wp/tag/AFBH "Annotated Fantasy Bedtime Hour")

-   [Coding](/wp/tag/coding)
    -   [JavaScript](/wp/tag/javascript)
    -   [WordPress](/wp/tag/wordpress)
    -   [WP Plugins](/wp/wordpress-plugins/ "WordPress Plugins")
    -   [Python](/wp/tag/python)

-   [Games](/wp/tag/games)
    -   [MTG](/wp/tag/mtg)
    -   [Quake 3](/wp/tag/q3a)

-   [Design](/wp/tag/design)
    -   [Photos](/wp/tag/photos)
    -   [Textual](/wp/tag/textual)
    -   [Abstract](/wp/tag/design+abstract)
    -   [Seamless](/wp/1998/11/30/seamless-backgrounds/)

-   [About](/wp/about/)
    -   [General](/wp/about/)
    -   [Résumé](/wp/resume/)

-   [Feeds](/wp/feed/)
    -   [Articles](/wp/feed/)
    -   [Comments](/wp/comments/feed/)

-   [Main](/wp/)

-   Status:
    -------

    -   How to diff two streams instead of files (in zsh on OS X): diff
        <(cat file1.ext) <(cat file2.ext)
        [2012-02-08](http://twitter.com/tadhg_ohiggins/statuses/167108490299584512)
    -   [More updates...](http://twitter.com/tadhg_ohiggins)

### [Pentadactyl](http://tadhg.com/wp/2011/03/24/pentadactyl/ "Permanent Link: Pentadactyl")

23:42 Thu 24 Mar 2011. Updated: 01:43 25 Mar 2011\
 [[software](http://tadhg.com/wp/tag/software/),
[tech](http://tadhg.com/wp/tag/tech/),
[Vim](http://tadhg.com/wp/tag/vim/), [web
browsing](http://tadhg.com/wp/tag/web-browsing/)]

[Pentadactyl](http://dactyl.sourceforge.net/pentadactyl/) is an add-on
for Firefox that allows for keyboard-focused interaction with the
browser by providing Vim-like keybindings. If you’re at all interested
in browsing with the keyboard instead of the mouse, you should try it
out.\
 \
 Pentadactyl is a fork of the older
[Vimperator](http://vimperator.org/vimperator) project, which I’ve been
using up to now; with my switch to Firefox 4 I decided to follow
[Seth](http://at.araxia.net/blog/seth/)’s lead and try it.

In many respects, the Vim modal approach to browsing makes even more
sense than it does for editing text: when you’re browsing, you’d already
in a “mode” where you don’t expect typing to produce output. Most of the
time, then, you’re not expecting most of the keys on the keyboard to do
anything at all, which seems like a serious waste. Being able to use
`k`{.docutils .literal} for up and `j`{.docutils .literal} for down is
already a significant gain in usability, and that’s the least of what
Pentadactyl gives you.

Browsing can be broken down into three major categories, and for each
one I prefer Pentadactyl’s way of dealing with them to the more
traditional approach.

#### Reading

Yes, having `j`{.docutils .literal} and `k`{.docutils .literal} makes
that much of a difference. `Space`{.docutils .literal} and
`Shift-Space`{.docutils .literal} help too, but you have them in the
basic browser. All four of those keys give you anything you can get from
the mouse’s scrollwheel, and in addition the Vim bindings of
`gg`{.docutils .literal} for “top of page” and `G`{.docutils .literal}
for “bottom of page” come in pretty handy. For moving in your browser
history, `H`{.docutils .literal} and `Backspace`{.docutils .literal}
(the latter a browser default) bring you to the previous page, and
`L`{.docutils .literal} to the next page.

Reading also means moving between the tabs you have open. Pentadactyl
gives you a lot of power for doing this, from `<number>b`{.docutils
.literal} to go to the nth tab to `b<string>`{.docutils .literal} to go
to the tab whose title matches the string. That might not sound like
much, but I routinely have 50+ tabs open in a window, and being able to
navigate between them easily is rather important.

#### Following Links

It was quite difficult for me to not call this section “clicking links”,
but that would really privilege the mouse too much… still, it’s clear
from the ubiquity of that meaning of “click” that browsing and mousing
have gone together from the start. It isn’t, however, the only way.
Pentadactyl gives you a number of modes to follow links; the only two I
use are `f`{.docutils .literal} and `F`{.docutils .literal}, for “open
in this tab” and “open in a new tab”. You hit the key, and then start
typing the text of the link; when it’s the only option left, Pentadactyl
will follow it. Again, this sounds cumbersome at first, but if you’re
used to typing it quickly becomes highly efficient. All visible links
are given numbers as soon as you enter one of those modes, and you can
select them with numbers as well.

If you already have the link in the clipboard, you can open it in the
current tab with `p`{.docutils .literal} and in a new tab with
`P`{.docutils .literal}.

#### Sharing links

We do this all the time, and for this Pentadactyl is clearly better.
Without it, you have to either use the mouse to click in the URL bar and
then select Copy, or hit `Ctrl/Cmd-L`{.docutils .literal} and
`Ctrl/Cmd-C`{.docutils .literal}. With Pentadactyl just `y`{.docutils
.literal} copies the current URL into the clipboard. If you’re trying to
get a link’s URL without following it, you can use one of the extended
hint modes, which function similarly to the follow modes:
`;y<string>`{.docutils .literal} will give you the URL of the link whose
text matches `string`{.docutils .literal}.

I do this a lot, and it works really well. Even better, I found out that
it works in [Muttator](http://vimperator.org/muttator), Vimperator’s
sister project for Thunderbird, so that I can copy links from email
messages to the clipboard with `i;y<string><cr>`{.docutils .literal}.

Since I often want to both follow and copy links (especially when
blogging), I find that this is a lot better than right-clicking on a
link and selecting copy and then clicking the link.

Those are just a few of the basics of Pentadactyl’s functionality. If
you want to keep your hands as close to the home row as possible, and/or
if micro-efficiency on tasks you perform hundreds of times every day
interests you, you should have a look at it.

« [AT&T: No Escape](http://tadhg.com/wp/2011/03/22/att-no-escape/)
(previous)

(next) [BoingBoing’s Classic Game
Deaths](http://tadhg.com/wp/2011/03/25/boingboings-classic-game-deaths/)
»

This entry was posted on Thursday, March 24th, 2011 at 23:42 24 Mar 2011
and is filed under
[Blog](http://tadhg.com/wp/category/blog/ "View all posts in Blog"). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](http://tadhg.com/wp/2011/03/24/pentadactyl/feed/) feed. You can
skip to the end and leave a response. Pinging is currently not allowed.

### Leave a Reply

Name (required)

Mail (will not be published) (required)

Website

\

Related Posts
-------------

-   [Tools for Writing reStructuredText in
    Vim](http://tadhg.com/wp/2012/10/07/tools-for-writing-restructuredtext-in-vim/)
    Sun 07 Oct 2012
-   [Vim and tmux in OS
    X](http://tadhg.com/wp/2012/08/26/vim-and-tmux-in-os-x/) Sun 26 Aug
    2012
-   [New Laptop Setup
    Steps](http://tadhg.com/wp/2012/08/12/new-laptop-setup-steps/) Sun
    12 Aug 2012
-   [Blog Features I
    Want](http://tadhg.com/wp/2012/03/11/blog-features-i-want/) Sun 11
    Mar 2012
-   [Fun with pandoc, Vim, and
    email](http://tadhg.com/wp/2011/01/21/fun-with-pandoc-vim-and-email/)
    Fri 21 Jan 2011
-   [Minor
    Achievements](http://tadhg.com/wp/2010/10/18/minor-achievements/)
    Mon 18 Oct 2010
-   [Some Tidbits from my `.vimrc`{.docutils
    .literal}](http://tadhg.com/wp/2010/10/07/some-tidbits-from-my-vimrc/)
    Thu 07 Oct 2010
-   [Adjusting Keyboard
    Shortcuts](http://tadhg.com/wp/2010/09/27/adjusting-keyboard-shortcuts/)
    Mon 27 Sep 2010
-   [Some Futurist Speculation on Screen
    Interfaces](http://tadhg.com/wp/2010/05/28/some-futurist-speculation-on-screen-interfaces/)
    Fri 28 May 2010
-   [sabbatical.close()](http://tadhg.com/wp/2010/05/16/sabbatical-close/)
    Sun 16 May 2010

Random Selection
----------------

\

Unless otherwise stated, all content copyright © Tadhg O'Higgins
1992–2014.

\

\nThis markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://tadhg.com/wp/2011/03/24/pentadactyl/
