  ------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  [![image](y18.gif)](http://www.ycombinator.com)   **[Hacker News](news)**![image](s.gif)[new](newest) | [comments](newcomments) | [show](show) | [ask](ask) | [jobs](jobs) | [submit](submit)   [login](login?whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)
  ------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

[](vote?for=8338750&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[Ask HN: What has been your experience with self-taught
engineers?](item?id=8338750)

37 points by [freework](user?id=freework) 6 days ago | [43
comments](item?id=8338750)

I'm a self-taught engineer. I took a programming class my freshman year
of college, but that's been it. Everything I know I've learned on my own
building various things over the years.

Most of my co-workers (90%+) are not self-taught. Most of them have CS
degrees. In my 5 years of professional programming, I've only worked
with one person who was self-taught.

I'm currently looking for a new job, but I'm not sure if I should
downplay my status of a self-taught developer or display it prominently.

\
\

\
\

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338904&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[agentultra](user?id=agentultra) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338904)

\
 My experience has varied wildly with person to person (*disclaimer: I
am self taught*).

In my limited experience there exists a spectrum of programmers in the
self-taught category. On the extreme left you have people whose sole
experience with programming is just getting the damn computer to do what
they want with as little effort as possible: copy and paste some code
that seems like it fixes the problem, run it, and tweak as necessary. On
the far right you have people who fell into programming as kids and took
to it like a moth to a flame. Without any prompting they taught
themselves assemblers for the various CPU architectures they came
across, learned about cellular automata and dove into artificial
chemistry, and could debate the finer points between normal and
applicative orders. They've probably toyed with developing their own
language using operational semantics or devoured texts on geometry and
linear algebra at the breakfast table. Most of us, fortunately, sit
somewhere in the middle.

I don't relish having to look for work as I am now. In my experience it
comes down to a handful of scenarios:

\1. You're sitting across the table from someone who is at least 10
years younger than you and has landed a senior role fresh out of school.
AFAIK they'll self-select towards people their own age that look like
them... and have similar life-experiences. You might not want to lead
with your self-taught badge and down-play it if you can. Don't hide it
though: you never know who you may come across and if you have the
experience to back you up you can be a very strong contender.

\2. HR drone at Big Co. is staring at your resume to figure out who you
are. You're candidate X out of 5 they have to interview today and 28
they will sift through this week. They're also simultaneous scanning for
keywords and will likely ask you where your education experience is
located on your CV. You can't do anything but be candid. Hopefully you
can knock the socks off of the developers in the next few rounds of
interviews and exploit the poor communication channels between HR and
staff. Unless the bureaucracy rules the roost: then you're just not in
the right place.

\3. You come recommended by someone you know who works at the company
you're applying to. You just have to get through the interview. Play up
your self-taughtness. It's really an advantage.

My rule of thumb is to wear my badge on my chest. I just have to ace the
technical interview (which is the hardest part for me... my typing speed
shrinks to nothing under pressure from a smooth 56-60wpm). What's the
worst that could happen?

[reply](reply?id=8338904&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338942&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[elwell](user?id=elwell) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338942)

\
 I would contend that the variability is about equal to a formally
educated candidate.

[reply](reply?id=8338942&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8339152&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[jcmurrayii](user?id=jcmurrayii) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8339152)

\
 Make education a non-issue, lead with what you have done, and what you
know.

I am a self-taught programmer, granted with a bit more experience than
you. I have actually very seldom if ever been asked about my educational
background during an interview, and hint: Those companies that made a
big deal of it? I usually ended up turning down their offers, due to a
very distinct lack of interest in working there that had nothing to do
with them questioning my education.

The education check, if it does come up, is usually more to check for
generic knowledge, algos, patterns, etc. Know these things, and know
them well. Understand testing software. Understand SCM. In short, be a
professional developer, and I'm pretty sure it won't be much of an
issue, unless you make it one.

Relevant Experience: Worked as an engineer, senior engineer, lead
developer, senior lead developer, and currently, a VP, Engineering...for
companies ranging from 1-50,000+ employees. I have built and led
multiple teams ranging from 2-21 developers in various mixes of on and
offshore developers.

Edit: Unlike many of the commenters, I am not afraid of looking for
work, and I don;t think you (or they) should be either! Its a great new
adventure, I generally move within 3 years at this phase in my career,
and I seldom if ever have any issue lining up interviews and competing
offers, following the advice above!

[reply](reply?id=8339152&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338819&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[Tloewald](user?id=Tloewald) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338819)

\
 I would say: neither.

Don't play it down, and don't make a thing of it. To do one makes it
look like you're hiding something, to do the other could easily look
dickish.

In my experience, no-one ever learned to code by studying
(undergraduate) computer science. Some people learned to code *while*
studying, but mostly the people who could already code perhaps became
better grounded programmers by studying comp sci while those who
couldn't still couldn't after they graduated. The best coders I knew in
college either left for jobs before graduation or did the absolute
minimum to graduate because they were already employed more than full
time while still studying.

Also in my experience, most of the companies I would want to work at
don't place much weight on an undergraduate CS degree. A degree may stop
your CV from being ignored, but five years of professional experience
and some basic interpersonal skills will count for more than a degree.
There are some places where degrees are indispensable -- some companies
have a thing about them (e.g. they may need to meet certain
accreditation requirements). Sometimes you see jobs where applicants are
expected to have graduate qualifications in CS (usually because they
think they're doing something very hard core, and the graduate degree is
seen as a *pons asinorum*) but you seldom see undergraduate degrees
being required.

[reply](reply?id=8338819&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338843&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[ddingus](user?id=ddingus) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338843)

\
 As others have said, position yourself in terms of skills and
accomplishments. If you have other attributes, such as some significant
hobby, people skills, have managed large projects, or other people,
include that too.

Let them know who you are and tell them what they can expect to get when
they hire you.

That is what they want to know. How you got there, whether it's the
school of hard knocks --a fine school mind you, or through University,
or apprenticeship, or all of the above isn't anywhere near as important
as making sure they very clearly understand who you are and what they
will get.

And on your end, make double damn sure you can add value appropriate for
the position you seek. Do the work to remove doubt, and it will show and
when they see it, your opportunity is that much improved. The bonus is
when you walk in the door, you are ready to get after it, not worried
about things that should have been sorted before you got there.

It's a two way street, and I've often thought a simple "has degree = 1"
type filter to be sort of a crutch. Both the prospect and the employer
need to reach a place of confidence so that it works.

An approach to this, business minded and technology minded, is a little
harder, because you do raise the bar some, but it's self selecting in a
good way. I've made a couple of pretty big jumps doing this and it was
all good. There is getting the work done, and that's hard and that's
what you get paid for. Not having the doubts there helps immensely.

It's not that you want to be a dick. You just want to feel really good
about the whole thing, and they want to feel good too, so make sure that
happens and that it's true and you can't lose.

Everybody, you included, need to do that, because it's just a pig
expensive when it doesn't, and everybody gets hurt a little, sometimes a
lot.

If they question any of it, tell 'em that too. Make sure they know these
things matter and you take it seriously.

Good luck!

[reply](reply?id=8338843&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338844&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[patio11](user?id=patio11) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338844)

\
 This is far from the most interesting thing you could say about
yourself. What in the last 5 years suggests you'll make your next
employer a lot of money? Focus on that, instead.

[reply](reply?id=8338844&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338792&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[xyzzy123](user?id=xyzzy123) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338792)

\
 I didn't go down the traditional CS route either. My advice is to state
your and accomplishments and demonstrate your abilities without making a
big deal of being "self taught".

Learning doesn't stop once one leaves university, and you've probably
noticed your CS educated colleagues taught themselves a lot over the
years too.

[reply](reply?id=8338792&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338965&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[kasey\_junk](user?id=kasey_junk) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338965)

\
 So let me add a couple of data points.

I've spent a lot of time experimenting with hiring pipelines and have
found 0 correlation between education and good development hires. That
is, when I did double blind experimental data collection, educational
certification is noise.

That said, when I talk to the developers I know that I consider "great"
who don't have CS education, they have a nearly 100% rate of regret, in
at least wishing they had the experience of a CS education. There are
things that are easier to learn in an academic setting than in any other
setting.

So, the short answer is I would highlight your professional experience,
but would not hide your lack of education.

The longer answer is, if you are getting into a resume/web form search
cycle you are probably doing it wrong. Your best bet is for personal
recommendations. If after 5 years in the industry you do not have
colleagues that can sherpa you into a job that you are interested in,
education is not your problem. Either you have neglected your
professional network, or your abilities are lower than you think. In
either case, changing your educational status will not help.

[reply](reply?id=8338965&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338977&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[bjmarte](user?id=bjmarte) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338977)

\
 I used to be very biased against self-taught engineers until one passed
our very difficult hiring gauntlet and turned out to be one of the best
developers I've ever worked with.

Edit: I think my takeaway is to primarily judge people on demonstrated
knowledge rather than declared knowledge.

Edit 2: But having said that I still wouldn't draw attention to the self
taught thing if I were you.

[reply](reply?id=8338977&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8339414&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[jamesbrewer](user?id=jamesbrewer) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8339414)

\
 Note: I am self-taught.

Here is what you need to know: It doesn't matter. Most people are biased
in one way or another. Stop trying to make other people happy.

The most important thing is that you have the skills to do the job
required. In interviews, draw on your skills and past experiences to
answers the interviewer's questions to the best of your ability. If that
isn't enough, believe me, you don't want to work there anyways.

Most people are biased in one way or another. Maybe your interviewer is
self-taught and maybe they aren't. Perhaps they've worked with a
terrible engineer that was "self-taught" or maybe their self-taught
engineer was the best thing since sliced bread. You can't pretend that
this won't cost you a few job opportunities, but is that so bad? Ask
yourself honestly, do you want to work with someone who doesn't think
you're competent because you didn't go to Stanford?

[reply](reply?id=8339414&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8339512&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[ukoms](user?id=ukoms) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8339512)

\
 I'm politic science MA and currently goes my 14th year in programming
for living. From my experience - and I've been working with self-taught
passionates and academic-taught masters over the years - you can assume
sort of rule about your future employer. If he's wise and know
programming market he'll never toss out anyone who doesn't have academic
degree in programming. Best specialists I know had no science degree in
IT field. They were all crazy about programming, fascinated about
possibilities and they were always improving themselves. Wise employer
will know this and take advantage of it. So - yes, You should state fact
You have no college degree in programming. I do and I had never regreted
it :)

[reply](reply?id=8339512&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338803&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[nostrademons](user?id=nostrademons) 6 days ago |
[link](item?id=8338803)

\
 It'll depend on who's on the other side of the hiring table.

I'm largely self-taught, but I have a CS degree from a good school.
(It's a long story...the CS degree came after the self-teaching, for the
most part.) If I were the hiring manager, someone who's self-taught
would be a mild bonus: it shows initiative and passion. Other people
think differently - some won't hire any without a degree, some would
rather not hire someone without a degree, many don't care. You can to
some extent choose who you work with and what they value by how you
position yourself.

[reply](reply?id=8338803&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338822&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[physcab](user?id=physcab) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338822)

\
 Ultimately, as in all professions, you want to be supported by your
manager. Building that trust is what earns you promotions, helps
proliferate your work, and contributes to your career goals. So I
completely agree with your comment, and would go further to say that if
the OP makes it a point of stating they are self-taught, they will self
select. They may have to churn through more interviews to make up for
the bias, but in the long run it will be more worthwhile.

[reply](reply?id=8338822&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8339103&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[hrktb](user?id=hrktb) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8339103)

\
 In my experience it doesn't matter as long as you have enough
experience. Or in other words, any difference in behaviour/knowledge
fades away after a few years of working on serious projects. After 5
years your initial formation might not matter anymore if you kept on
learning new things regularly.

For the image aspect, I often worked with self-taughed people who lacked
generic knowledge like design patterns, but where openly enthouthiastic
about learning anything new. Overall it's a wash.

[reply](reply?id=8339103&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8340517&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[wetfossils](user?id=wetfossils) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8340517)

\
 In the current context, I would say that being self-taught is more of
an advantage. Programmers today are normally expected to be pragmatic
and demonstrate their autonomy and dedication, which I assume you did.
While a computer science degree is a nice addition, it is no substitute
for having something to show for. Unless you're applying for a position
which focuses on a CS curriculum, it really comes down the the value you
have to offer.

However, because ignorance is bliss, try to keep humble about your
advantages over those university graduates who came to focus on other
aspects of the trade. Be aware of your own value and sell what you're
good at. Also, make sure that you are legally allowed to refer to
yourself as an engineer. In some countries, it's a very specific title
controlled by a professional organisation.

Believe me, it's much harder for a CS graduate to get a job without
adequate practical experience than it is for someone with a decent
portfolio.

[reply](reply?id=8340517&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338948&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[gkmoyn](user?id=gkmoyn) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338948)

\
 I find that self-taught people have a bias towards self-taught. They
see it as a reflection of passion, because that's someone who took their
own initiative to learn.

I see it differently, for two reasons:

\1. The best programmers I've ever worked with (directly, and also the
best programmers in the company) were NOT self-taught. They did CS
undergrad, possibly MS, and (rarely) PhD. So I simply observe a strong
correlation.

\2. To me, if you chose another degree for your undergrad, then that's a
signal that you were NOT most passionate about computers at that age.
Film school, art school, poli sci... you either liked those fields more
than computers, or were stronger in those areas. Fantastic. But I could
not imagine myself having chosen any degree except CS, having programmed
since a wee lad.

Now, I've met and worked with plenty of self-taught awesomes, including
with non-CS degrees, or without any undergrad at all.

For me, degree isn't a must-have on a resume. But I like the signal.

[reply](reply?id=8338948&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338786&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[coreymgilmore](user?id=coreymgilmore) 6 days ago |
[link](item?id=8338786)

\
 I'm all for it. You learn by your own method. It is just hard for
people to understand when they spent years of their lives earning a
degree they can place next to their names.

That being said, formal education can teach a wider range of skills and
provide guidance to understanding larger concepts.

All in all, I am self taught and respect people heavily for it.

[reply](reply?id=8338786&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8341122&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[frituredeluxe](user?id=frituredeluxe) 6 days ago |
[link](item?id=8341122)

\
 To be honest, there are no real different experiences with self-taught
engineers compared to university grads-

It's difficult to say what makes a good engineer, but in my opinion it's
more the tinkering and curiosity kind of stuff that really matters. Some
may call that soft skills, so odds are it's equally likely to find those
characteristics in both autodidacts and grads.

Maybe that's the reason why Facebook is on PHP: They they: We need a
personality kind of guy as developer no matter what he has learnt or
not, so we take PHP as we can teach him that very quickly.

One thing which is more common in self-taught people is humbleness and
modesty.

So, what you should do is display it prominently: Being a self-taught
guy highlights the curiosity you need for being an engineer at most, in
my believs

hth

[reply](reply?id=8341122&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8340977&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[AnimalMuppet](user?id=AnimalMuppet) 6 days ago |
[link](item?id=8340977)

\
 I have a degree, but it's in math and physics, not in programming. I
had one programming class in high school (Fortran) and one in college
(Basic - but by that time, I already knew Basic).

I've known at least two other self-taught programmers, at least one of
whom didn't even have a college degree. They were good engineers. There
wasn't any "you're lower in status because you're self-taught" stuff (at
least not among the programmers - management may have rated them lower,
I don't know).

I wouldn't downplay it, and I wouldn't display it prominently. In this
world, pretty much you are what you can do. If you can do it, who cares
how you got there?

[reply](reply?id=8340977&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8339143&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[KrisAndrew](user?id=KrisAndrew) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8339143)

\
 My advice is to completely downplay your [lack of] education. If they
ask you about it, just tell them you are self-taught, and wait for the
next question. You should focus on what you've *done* at your job and
outside projects. Emphasize the results you've gotten and the systems
you've built.

You might have a slight disadvantage during the initial part of the
recruitment process (resume submission). My advice in regard to that is
to try and get in touch or meet the non-HR people at the company. That
way you get can a referral and your resume is just a formality. If this
isn't an option for you, the just make sure you keyword your work
experience well, and pray. :)

[reply](reply?id=8339143&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8340177&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[jpgvm](user?id=jpgvm) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8340177)

\
 Disclaimer: I am a self taught programmer.

Personally I prefer self taught engineers over university or other
education. Autodidacts are generally more motivated to learn in my
experience and represent the very best engineers I have had the pleasure
of working with.

The best university educated minds I have worked with have tended to
come from non-CS backgrounds, specifically mathematics and physics.

This is not to say CS degrees are not useful, just my personal anecdotal
evidence leads me to favor the self taught, mostly for their attitude
and general grit.

[reply](reply?id=8340177&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338893&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[nmrm](user?id=nmrm) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338893)

\
 The distinction/dichotomy is over-blown. It may be that most people you
work with have CS degrees, but that doesn't mean most people you work
with aren't self-taught.

That's because most self-taught programmers end up with degrees --
either in CS or other fields. All of the good programmers I know had
substantial personal projects and/or open source contributions before
starting college, and continued throughout college.

The answer also depends on what problems you'd like to work on and where
you'd like to work.

[reply](reply?id=8338893&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338883&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[bbarn](user?id=bbarn) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338883)

\
 All good engineers are self taught... to a degree.

That doesn't mean they don't hold advanced degrees in whatever, but
great engineers IMO are the types who whether they spend their 20th
birthday in a dorm or on the job, have been interested/passionate/doing
something in engineering since before they even knew to call it
engineering.

YMMV, but I've never met a great software (or mechanical) engineer that
wasn't into it before school COULD have happened, regardless of whether
they went.

[reply](reply?id=8338883&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338799&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[geetee](user?id=geetee) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338799)

\
 I used to be biased towards self-taught engineers--probably because I
am one--but now I am indifferent. For an entry level job, I'll probably
still lean towards the self-taught candidate. But, mid or upper range? I
don't think it is relevant anymore at that stage in their career. I
place more value on someone who actually has a passion for the field
over one where it's simply a means to pay the mortgage.

[reply](reply?id=8338799&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338902&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[Rapzid](user?id=Rapzid) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338902)

\
 Others have mentioned similar but here is my advice. As a self taught
engineer what goes on my CV are roles with responsibilities , then
specific accomplishements and values I delivered in those roles. That's
it. Apply for roles that will give you more experience and
responsibilities. Consider you prior experience and CV evidence you are
up to the task. Exude confidence in this. Have fun.

[reply](reply?id=8338902&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8339104&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[skuunk1](user?id=skuunk1) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8339104)

\
 IMHO if you have 5 years of professional experience, having a CS degree
is merely an afterthought (unless you are going for a teaching or highly
specialized occupation).

One can only really teach one's self to program.

List your work experience prominently and highlight your
responsibilities and achievements.

[reply](reply?id=8339104&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338791&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[underwater](user?id=underwater) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338791)

\
 I wouldn't call attention to it. Not because it's bad, but because it
sounds like bragging.

We all learned to code. Calling attention to your self taught background
makes it sound like you think your way was more a more legitimate
experience.

Focus on what you've built instead.

[reply](reply?id=8338791&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8340243&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[jmdavis\_](user?id=jmdavis_) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8340243)

\
 Ever think of getting a degree? College graduates write better and have
depth that takes a long time to absorb in an unstructured environment.
It's called take classes at night. And over lunch. Self taught that
sacrificed time and got the degree is impressive.

[reply](reply?id=8340243&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338784&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[lukeholder](user?id=lukeholder) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338784)

\
 I would suggest not focusing on it either way. Just focus on the
projects you have built, the technology you used, and your skills in
delivering.

[reply](reply?id=8338784&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338833&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[freework](user?id=freework) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338833)

\
 Thats what I've been doing. My resume lists the dozens of projects I've
completed. Out of every 50 resume's I send out, I get maybe one
interview. I don't think anyone even looks at my github. As soon as they
see I don't have a degree, they throw my resume out.

[reply](reply?id=8338833&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338859&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[patio11](user?id=patio11) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338859)

\
 You should not primarily be attempting to get interviews by sending in
50+ resumes. Instead, try to get 5 coffee dates with people with the
authority to hire engineers.

Resumes are an institution created to allow people to throw out resumes.

[reply](reply?id=8338859&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8340545&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[MrDom](user?id=MrDom) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8340545)

\
 I'm curious, how does this sort of thing work when you're in japan? Or
remote in general. Send them a coffee voucher and get them on the phone?

[reply](reply?id=8340545&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8340875&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[patio11](user?id=patio11) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8340875)

\
 Meeting people on the phone is totally doable, especially if you have
an introduction to them or have pre-demonstrated credibility somehow. It
doesn't 100% play to my strengths, so I did a *lot* of flying around
back when I was doing active consulting. My engagements were worth
\~$50k apiece so taking a $10k trip to a conference (or just a
target-rich area like, say, SF) was totally doable if it got me four
later stage conversations with a 25% chance of closing apiece.

Typically it would look something like "4 week prospecting trip, fill up
2\~3 quarters worth of consulting engagements, fill up last quarter
while delivering." This was a hard schedule to sustain after getting
married, which is one reason I'm not actively consulting anymore.

But there are many, many ways to do this. A more successful consultant
*in Ogaki* does 90% of his prospecting over Skype.

[reply](reply?id=8340875&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338906&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[look\_at\_me\_](user?id=look_at_me_) 6 days ago |
[link](item?id=8338906)

\
 I've done both technical and non technical interviewing and screening
and here's what I've picked up. You probably already know all this, but
these are the biggest mistakes I've witnessed...

Try to hit the key words, keep it simple but professional, and keep it
crawlable -- don't stray too far from the traditional resume unless it's
part of a strategy. this means don't send me a markdown file, or
anything in a plain text document, don't make it look like a Google
search (it really happened, looked awful and conveyed no useful info)
and if the reader cannot immediately pick up on your history in under 10
seconds you've already been screened out..

Send a pdf, so you have better control on presentation, or at worst a
.doc file.

This all sounds superficial, but getting hired is a game that has to be
played.

[reply](reply?id=8338906&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338841&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[ryan-c](user?id=ryan-c) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338841)

\
 How much professional experience do you have?

[reply](reply?id=8338841&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338790&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[giblaz](user?id=giblaz) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338790)

\
 This. Focusing on it will make you seem like its an area of concern for
you. If you can produce well at the job, make that clear by showing
evidence (projects).

That would be plenty enough to convince me.

[reply](reply?id=8338790&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338788&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[canterburry](user?id=canterburry) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338788)

\
 I agree. How you got there is completely irrelevant. What you have
accomplished is.

[reply](reply?id=8338788&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338861&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[danvayn](user?id=danvayn) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338861)

\
 Same as you OP, except about 4.8 years less.

[reply](reply?id=8338861&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338890&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[hoodoof](user?id=hoodoof) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338890)

\
 Dammit they keep on learning things!

[reply](reply?id=8338890&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338795&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[j45](user?id=j45) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338795)

\
 Ultimately where you are going to be happy is a place that accepts you
for who you are, how you are and how you're always learning and
improving yourself.

It's not about what your degree makes of you, but what you make of your
degree. In your case, being self-taught, and remaining self-taught in
having a body of knowledge that you're always learning is in some ways,
as a developer, more relevant than a degree.

There are just as many CS devs who think they're done learning and stay
stuck and don't push themselves. The difference makers are always the
ones who are building in their own time. Build your body of work and
keep it public.

[reply](reply?id=8338795&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338806&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[markdown](user?id=markdown) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338806)

\
 I'm confused. Are you an engineer or a programmer?

[reply](reply?id=8338806&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338836&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[catsnip](user?id=catsnip) 6 days ago | [link](item?id=8338836)

\
 Are you really confused? Seems more likely you're being needlessly
snarky. Dude's clearly a programmer by trade who chooses to refer to
himself as an "engineer", as is extremely common.

[reply](reply?id=8338836&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

![image](s.gif)

[](vote?for=8338850&dir=up&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

[thisGuysAccount](user?id=thisGuysAccount) 6 days ago |
[link](item?id=8338850)

\
 There's a legal distinction in some countries. Guy might be from one of
those countries.

[reply](reply?id=8338850&whence=%69%74%65%6d%3f%69%64%3d%38%33%33%38%37%35%30)

\
\

![image](s.gif)

  --
  --

\

[Guidelines](newsguidelines.html) | [FAQ](newsfaq.html) | [Lists](lists)
| [Bookmarklet](bookmarklet.html) | [DMCA](dmca.html) | [News
News](newsnews.html) | [Bugs and Feature
Requests](https://github.com/HackerNews/HN/issues) | [Y
Combinator](http://www.ycombinator.com/) |
[Apply](http://www.ycombinator.com/apply/) |
[Library](http://www.ycombinator.com/resources/) |
[Contact](http://www.ycombinator.com/contact/)\
\

Search:

\


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=8338750
