New Republic
------------

[![image](/sites/all/themes/tnr/assets/images/logo-100-slim.png)](/)

** Menu

[Politics](/tags/politics) [Culture](/tags/culture)
[Magazine](/current-issue) [The Latest](/latest)
[Israel/Palestine](/tags/israel-palestine) [Q.E.D.](/qed)
[Books](/tags/books) [Ferguson](/tags/ferguson) [Next Republic
**](/tags/future-work)

[![Next
Republic](/sites/all/themes/tnr/assets/images/suisse/next-republic-navcallout.jpg)](/project/next-republic)

### [Gender](/tags/gender)

[![image](http://www.newrepublic.com/sites/default/files/styles/latest/public/female_scientist.jpg?itok=v9uPfiRu)](/article/119363/why-there-arent-more-top-female-scientists-leaky-pipeline)

### [Women Don't Stick with the Sciences. Here's Why.](/article/119363/why-there-arent-more-top-female-scientists-leaky-pipeline)

[Rotem Ben-Shachar](/authors/rotem-ben-shachar)

### [Gender](/tags/gender)

[![image](http://www.newrepublic.com/sites/default/files/styles/latest/public/u18558/gender_quotas.jpg?itok=rPFZo-WS)](/article/119343/impact-quotas-corporate-gender-equality)

### [Gender Quotas Worked in Norway. Why Not Here?](/article/119343/impact-quotas-corporate-gender-equality)

[Alice Lee](/authors/alice-lee)

### [Urban Life](/tags/urban-life)

[![image](http://www.newrepublic.com/sites/default/files/styles/latest/public/u18558/unnamed.jpg?itok=ulKshBWK)](/article/119326/most-diverse-apartment-building-country)

### [This Is the Most Diverse Apartment Building in America](/article/119326/most-diverse-apartment-building-country)

[Elaine Teng](/authors/elaine-teng)

[Subscribe Now](/subscription/self/header) **

[Order a Subscription](/subscription/self/dropdown) [Give a
Gift](/subscription/gift/header) [International
Orders](/subscription/international/header) [Canadian
Orders](/subscription/canada/header) [Digital
Subscription](/subscription/digital/header)

[Sign In](/page/account-information)

**

[Sign In](/page/account-information)
[Subscribe](/subscription/self/header)

Sections

[The Latest](/latest) [QED](/qed) [Politics](/tags/politics)
[Culture](/tags/culture) [The Magazine](/current-issue) [Next
Republic](/tags/future-work)

Photo: Philippe Huguen/AFP

![When Workers Own Their Companies, Everyone
Wins](http://www.newrepublic.com/sites/default/files/styles/static_cover_img_500/public/philippe-huguen-afp.jpg?itok=ZB1HBHfo)

[Economy](/tags/economy)

##### August 1, 2014

##### By [Sean McElwee](/authors/sean-mcelwee) Photo: Philippe Huguen/AFP

In 1921, the Olympia Veneer Company became the first worker-owned
cooperative to produce plywood. By the early 1950s, nearly all of the
plywood produced in the United States was manufactured by worker-owned
cooperatives. Today, however, worker-owned cooperatives seem few and far
between. Say “co-op” and most people think of Park Slope foodies or
strictly guarded apartment buildings. Worker ownership may seem a relic
of the past, but it could actually play a significant role in reviving
the union movement, bolstering the green economy, and stemming the tide
of deindustrialization.

Today, there are [only about](http://reic.uwcc.wisc.edu/issues/) 30,000
cooperatives, strictly defined, employing 856,000 workers in the United
States. Most of these cooperatives are consumer cooperatives, owned by
consumers, rather than workers. (Technically, cooperatives are defined
by incorporation, ownership, and tax-filing status.) But about 47
percent of American [workers participate
in](http://www.amazon.com/The-Citizens-) profit-sharing arrangements of
some sort. Employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs), for instance,
[involve
around](http://www.amazon.com/The-Citizens-Share-Ownership-Democracy/dp/0300192258)
10 million workers and range from plans that are essentially
cooperatives (in which workers have decision-making power) to plans in
which workers have stock, but no ownership or decision-making
power—these are essentially profit-sharing by a different name. Procter
and Gamble, the twenty-seventh largest corporation in America [is
estimated to
be](http://www.amazon.com/The-Citizens-Share-Ownership-Democracy/dp/0300192258)
10 to 20 percent employee-owned. Among the Fortune 100, [many
companies](http://www.amazon.com/The-Citizens-Share-Ownership-Democracy/dp/0300192258)
have employee ownership plans, including Exxon Mobile, Chevron,
ConocoPhillips, GM, Ford, Intel, UPS, Amazon, Coca-Cola, Cisco, and
Morgan Stanley.

Against this backdrop, it’s not so surprising that some are making the
case for co-ops. Union leaders, in particular, argue that there is
significant opportunity to expand the coop model by associating it more
closely with unions. This make sense: Unions are looking for new allies
and methods for increasing worker control, while cooperatives can
benefit from the organizational skill and scalability of unions.
Associating with coops would also allow the unions to extend their
reach. While the union movement is concentrated in manufacturing, [a
recent
study](http://community-wealth.org/sites/clone.community-wealth.org/files/downloads/WorkerCoops-PathwaysToScale.pdf)
by Hilary Abell finds that 58 percent of cooperatives are in the retail
and service sectors. “If you go back to the beginning of the labor
movement,” says activist Carl Davidson, “unions and cooperatives used to
go together like bread and jelly.”

Leo Gerard, the President of United Steelworkers Union, has been vocal
about the possibility of what he calls “union cooperatives.” He has even
studied this: In the wake of the recession, his union allied with
Mondragon, a large federation of cooperatives based in Spain, and spent
three years developing ways to build a similar movement in the states.
Gerard noted that even [while the Spanish economy has fared
poorly](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-19213425) in recent years,
Mondragon proved resilient, [maintaining steady
employment](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/07/mondragon-spains-gi).

The idea is catching on in the U.S. as well. In Pittsburgh, a “union
cooperative” industrial laundry called Clean and Green uses green
technologies and employs 120 worker owners. The business replaces a
traditionally-run laundry; if it succeeds it will be a potent
proof-of-concept for the cooperative movement. Two thousand minority
home health-care workers in New York City formed a cooperative that
increased their wages and benefits while also giving them more control
of their working conditions. They are coordinating with the Service
Employees International Union (SEIU. The coop model might provide unions
with just the fresh air that they need. The economist Richard Wolff
tells me that, “Unions concentrated mostly on how to minimize what to
give back. They very rarely think in terms of strategic alternatives.”

Coops are also already an important part of the emerging green economy.
In Cincinnati, [one
cooperative](http://www.soapboxmedia.com/forgood/121112unioncoop.aspx)
is connected with local building trades, and it retrofits buildings with
green energy technologies. The nascent nature of the industry makes it
ideal for cooperatives, which cannot be formed in industries already
dominated by large hierarchical corporations. Ohio Cooperative Solar,
[for instance](http://american.coop/node/253), installs solar panels on
rooftops in downtown Cleveland.

Cooperatives can also supplement economic development programs in cities
suffering under the weight of deindustrialization. In Cleveland,
historian and political economist Gar Alperovitz has developed a
cooperative model based on the idea of “anchor institutions.” He aims to
use institutions like hospitals, local government, and universities,
which are constantly in demand, to serve as a bulwark against the
vicissitudes of the business cycle. He tells me that he’s had interest
in his anchor-institutions model from representatives from about a
hundred cities across the country. Cincinnati has experimented with the
anchor-institution model, as well as Atlanta, Washington, D.C., and
Jacksonville. Most of these areas are either deindustrialized or were
hit hard by the housing crisis.

And coops are not just good for unions, the environment, and struggling
towns—they are good for workers, too. A [meta-study
by](http://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/ialrr49&div=8&)
economist Chris Doucouliagos examines 43 published studies and find that
profit-sharing, worker-ownership, and worker participation in
decision-making are correlated with higher productivity. The effects are
stronger among labor-managed firms than among those with merely
worker-ownership schemes like ESOPs. This seems to be playing out in the
Union Cab Cooperative in Madison, Wisconsin. The coop was formed when
cab drivers—who were fed up with long hours, poor benefits, and low
pay—ditched management and bought the cabs themselves. The cooperative
is run by a nine-person board of directors elected by the workers who
sit for terms of no more than three years. In total, about 60 workers
are involved in management, with representation distributed throughout
the cooperative. The highest-paid workers make a base salary that is
only 2.2 times the lowest-paid workers, although drivers who spend more
hours driving and those elected to management positions make more.

The Union Cab Cooperative isn’t going to overtake Uber any time soon,
but there is no reason to believe that cooperatives have to remain
small. The Spanish coop that aligned with United Steelworkers, after
all, has 80,321 employees. Its revenues in 2012 were €14.081 billion. In
the United States, Hy-Vee, a chain of 235 supermarkets with 62,000
employees and $8 billion in revenue is entirely employee-owned.

The appeal of worker-ownership in the United States could even cross
partisan lines. The two biggest supporters of ESOPs are the conservative
Dana Rohrabacher and socialist Bernie Sanders. In 1999, [they
co-sponsored](http://www.nceo.org/employee-ownership-update/1999-06-21)
“The Employee Ownership Act of 1999” which would grant companies with a
threshold of worker ownership an exemption from the federal income tax.
Sadly, more recent cooperative bills have been primarily [supported by
liberals](http://www.veoc.org/node/68). But conservative policy wonks
talk about an “[ownership society](http://money),” and cooperatives are
an ideal way to promote ownership and responsibility.

According to [Democracy Collaborative](http://community-wealth.org), the
world’s largest 300 cooperatives together constitute the ninth largest
national economy. America is a land of ownership and democracy—and yet
these values are generally ignored in the workforce. Cooperatives can
change that.

Sean McElwee is a research assistant at [Demos](http://www.demos.org/).
You can find him on twitter
[@SeanMcElwee](https://twitter.com/SeanMcElwee).

Loading Related Articles...

[![Politics](/sites/all/themes/tnr/assets/images/tags/tnr-politics-187x80.gif)](/tags/politics)

#### More articles tagged as

[Economy](/tags/economy)[politics](/tags/politics)[qed](/tags/qed)[future
of work](/tags/future-work)

Related Trending

More Articles in [Economy](/tags/economy)

[August Jobs Report
Disappoints](/article/119328/august-jobs-report-weak-job-growth-disappoints-economists)

[Unemployed Americans Are Miserable, and Republicans Are Making It
Worse](/article/119159/extension-long-term-unemployment-benefits-would-increase-happiness)

[Wrecking an Economy Means Never Having to Say You're
Sorry](/article/119002/justice-departments-wall-street-settlement-deals-are-shameful)

[Slumlord
Millionaires](/article/118838/wall-street-slumlords-how-banks-started-buying-rental-units)

[CNBC's Rick Santelli Was Embarrassed on Live TV for Being Wrong About
the Economy. But He's Hardly
Alone.](/article/118693/steve-liesman-cuts-short-rick-santellis-cnbc-rant-about-inflation)

Popular Articles

Now **

Now

This Week

This Month

[The Trouble With
Harvard](/article/119321/harvard-ivy-league-should-judge-students-standardized-tests)

[How to Succeed in Silicon Valley Without Really
Trying](/article/119350/amicus-app-how-tech-investors-are-failing-due-diligence)

[Don't Send Your Kid to the Ivy
League](/article/118747/ivy-league-schools-are-overrated-send-your-kids-elsewhere)

[Ray Bradbury's Venomous, Brilliant Letter to a Writer Who Wanted To
Stop Old People From
Voting](/article/119310/ray-bradburys-reply-stopping-old-people-voting)

[Why Aren't Women Advancing At Work? Ask a Transgender
Person.](/article/119239/transgender-people-can-explain-why-women-dont-advance-work)

**

**

Choose Service

[Save to
Instapaper](http://www.instapaper.com/hello2?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.newrepublic.com%2Farticle%2F118933%2Feconomic-benefits-coop&title=When+Workers+Own+Their+Companies%2C+Everyone+Wins&description=How+a+very+old+economic+model+could+help+the+new+economy.)
[Save to
Readability](http://readability.com/save?url=http://www.newrepublic.com/article/118933/economic-benefits-coop)

**

Small

Medium

Large

Extra Large

**

[![image](/sites/all/themes/tnr/assets/images/qed/qed-header-1400x190.jpg)](/qed)

[![image](/sites/default/files/styles/static_cover_img_500/public/shutterstock_193541642.jpg)](/article/119369/republican-senate-candidates-endorse-over-counter-birth-control)

#### [Don't Buy Republicans' Sudden Change of Heart on Birth Control](/article/119369/republican-senate-candidates-endorse-over-counter-birth-control)

[![image](/sites/default/files/styles/static_cover_img_500/public/healthcare_doc.jpg)](/article/119359/narrow-networks-and-obamacare-consumers-may-be-better)

#### [Maybe You Don't Need a Big Doctor Network to Get Good Care](/article/119359/narrow-networks-and-obamacare-consumers-may-be-better)

[![image](/sites/default/files/styles/static_cover_img_500/public/452666244.jpg)](/article/119362/number-apprehensions-kids-crossing-southwest-border-falling)

#### [It's the End of the Border Crisis as We Know It](/article/119362/number-apprehensions-kids-crossing-southwest-border-falling)

Loading

Loading

Sign up for our newsletter to get the latest news from QED

**

Sign Up

** Signed up!

** Article Tools

Loading Comments

Trending Related

Popular Articles

Now **

Now

This Week

This Month

[The Trouble With
Harvard](/article/119321/harvard-ivy-league-should-judge-students-standardized-tests)

[How to Succeed in Silicon Valley Without Really
Trying](/article/119350/amicus-app-how-tech-investors-are-failing-due-diligence)

[Don't Send Your Kid to the Ivy
League](/article/118747/ivy-league-schools-are-overrated-send-your-kids-elsewhere)

[Ray Bradbury's Venomous, Brilliant Letter to a Writer Who Wanted To
Stop Old People From
Voting](/article/119310/ray-bradburys-reply-stopping-old-people-voting)

[Why Aren't Women Advancing At Work? Ask a Transgender
Person.](/article/119239/transgender-people-can-explain-why-women-dont-advance-work)

More Articles in [Economy](/tags/economy)

[The Trouble With
Harvard](/article/119321/harvard-ivy-league-should-judge-students-standardized-tests)

[How to Succeed in Silicon Valley Without Really
Trying](/article/119350/amicus-app-how-tech-investors-are-failing-due-diligence)

[Don't Send Your Kid to the Ivy
League](/article/118747/ivy-league-schools-are-overrated-send-your-kids-elsewhere)

[Ray Bradbury's Venomous, Brilliant Letter to a Writer Who Wanted To
Stop Old People From
Voting](/article/119310/ray-bradburys-reply-stopping-old-people-voting)

[Why Aren't Women Advancing At Work? Ask a Transgender
Person.](/article/119239/transgender-people-can-explain-why-women-dont-advance-work)

**

**

Choose Service

[Save to
Instapaper](http://www.instapaper.com/hello2?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.newrepublic.com%2Farticle%2F118933%2Feconomic-benefits-coop&title=When+Workers+Own+Their+Companies%2C+Everyone+Wins&description=How+a+very+old+economic+model+could+help+the+new+economy.)
[Save to
Readability](http://readability.com/save?url=http://www.newrepublic.com/article/118933/economic-benefits-coop)

**

Small

Medium

Large

Extra Large

**

\>

**

![image](/sites/all/themes/tnr/assets/images/logo-white.png) Share by
e-mail

Friend's e-mails (separated by comma)

Your name

Your e-mail

Send yourself a copy

Personal message

Cancel

** Send E-mail

**

##### Sections

[The Latest](/latest) [Politics](/tags/politics)
[Culture](/tags/culture) [The Magazine](/current-issue)

More Books Economy Film The Plank Politics Technology World Current
Issue About Advertise Contact Us Jobs & Internships Privacy Policy Home
News Events Archives RSS

**

##### Sections

[Books](/tags/books/) [Economy](/tags/economy/) [Film](/tags/film/) [The
Plank](/tags/plank/) [Politics](/tags/politics/)
[Technology](/tags/technology/) [World](/tags/world/)
[Events](/tags/events/)

##### The Magazine

[Our Latest](/latest) [Current Issue](/current-issue)

##### Subscriptions

[Order a Subscription](/subscription/self/footer/textlink) [Give a
Gift](/subscription/gift/footer/textlink) [Subscriber
Services](/page/subscriber-services) [Archives](/ebsco)
[FAQ](/page/frequently-asked-questions)

##### The New Republic

[About](/page/about-new-republic)
[Advertise](/page/advertise-new-republic) [Newsletter](/newsletter)
[Contact Us](/page/contact-us) [Jobs &
Internships](/page/jobs-and-internships) [Privacy
Policy](/page/privacy-policy) [Home News](/tags/home-news)
[RSS](/page/rss-feeds)

**

#### Sign Up For The New Republic Daily

Sign up now to get your dose of politics, culture, and big ideas with
our free daily newsletter.

**

Sign Up

** Signed up!

**

#### [Subscribe Now](/subscription/self/footer/callout)

##### Get The New Republic for **$19.97/year**

[![image](http://www.newrepublic.com/sites/default/files/styles/curr_issue_cover_footer/public/u184683/091514_cover.online.jpg?itok=Bi-xL7iU)](/subscription/self/footer/callout)

[** Subscribe Now](/subscription/self/footer/callout) [** Give a
Gift](/subscription/gift/footer) [** International
Orders](/subscription/international/footer) [** Digital
Subscription](/subscription/digital/footer)

[![image](/sites/all/themes/tnr/assets/images/logo-white.png)](/)

[Masthead](/page/masthead)

Copyright 2014 © The New Republic. All Rights Reserved.

![image](http://b.collective-media.net/seg/cm/l1dd)

![Quantcast](http://pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-abwxcJNao5fsc.gif)
![image](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/993343767/?value=0&label=gzoeCIDN0QMQkLP42wM&guid=ON&script=0)
![image](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-bin/m?ci=us-106312h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)
![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=15230262&cv=2.0&cj=1)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.newrepublic.com/article/118933/economic-benefits-coop
