[waiworinao ★ random notes by arvid andersson](/)
=================================================

[About](http://arvidandersson.se)
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/#!/arvid_a) [RSS](/atom.xml)

June 17th 2014

[Best practices in modern web projects](/2014/06/17/best-practices-in-modern-web-projects)
==========================================================================================

At [Oktavilla](http://oktavilla.se) we regularly start new projects.
Over the years we have therefore come up with a few best practices to
ensure that it is easy to take part in our projects and reduce errors.
We use these in the majority of our projects, both internally and for
clients. In the end we deliver high quality web projects and this is one
part of that process.

In this blog post I focus on a few practices related to the technical
side of things. Like setup and what to think about when choosing tools
and processes for a project. Each practice has a link or two in the end
to resources with more information.

Let's start out with the most important file in a project.

The README file
---------------

A project must have a README file in its root directory. It contains
information on the project and how get started with it. A new team
member should easily get a understanding of what this project is and how
to get started working with it from reading this file.

When writing the README think of the reader as a novice with basic
knowledge of programming environments. Format the text with
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) to make it easy
for a reader to digest. Markdown is both easily read as source code and
can be rendered as HTML (Github does this automatically for example).

A README should include at least the following sections:

### Introduction

A brief introduction that explains what the purpose of this project is.
Also include the projects role if it is a part of larger architecture,
who the client might be and any other information that might be good to
know.

### Dependencies

Include a list of dependencies that need to be installed separately. For
example: database servers, package managers and programming languages.
Be sure to include what versions are required as well.

### Local development setup

Someone who is new to the project should easily understand how get to it
up and running for local development using the README. Let the reader
know what steps to take with a freshly made copy of the project's code.
This can be notes on how to install needed packages, start the
application and run the tests.

Use concrete examples like what to type into the shell to invoke the
different tasks.

### Configuration

If the application can be configured using environment variables include
a list of these. Explain what each environment variable is used for.

### Deploy

Part of working on a project is also being able to deploy your changes.
Let the reader know how to deploy code to production and staging
environments.

For example, if you use [Heroku](http://heroku.com), include concrete
example on how to set up the different git remotes used for deploy and
how to push code to these.

-   [Readme Driven
    Development](http://tom.preston-werner.com/2010/08/23/readme-driven-development.html)
-   [How To Write A Great
    README](http://robots.thoughtbot.com/how-to-write-a-great-readme)
-   [The Most Important Code Isn't
    Code](http://zachholman.com/posts/documentation/)

Git
---

First of all, use git for version control. It is modern, works great and
the majority of developers are either comfortable in using it or want to
start using it.

### Deployable master branch

Keep the master branch deployable at all times. Sooner or later you will
get a bug reported on the code running in production that needs to be
fixed right away. Keeping your current work in a separate branch allows
for fast switching to the master branch for the bug fix and it also give
you the courage to deploy without the risk of putting any new or unknown
code in front of your application users.

### Commit messages

Strive to write informative commit messages. A good commit message
should include a short title and body. The title explains what the
purpose of the change was and the body gives more information on why
this change was needed. Think of commit messages as documentation of
your code.

If there is any extra information that might be useful for someone
looking at the commit, include that in the body. For example, if there
is a corresponding issue in your issue tracker be sure to include a
reference to the related issue.

### Pull requests

Use a web based git hosting alternative like
[GitHub](https://github.com/) or [BitBucket](https://bitbucket.org/)
that supports pull requests for branches. This let you tell other team
members about code changes before they are merged into the master
branch.

Use this for discussion and to spread knowledge about different parts of
the code base by [code
reviews](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_review). Code reviews can be
both high level or very thorough. The important thing is that someone
else other than the author takes a look at the changes and says “thumbs
up” before the code is merged into the master.

Be open to discussion, but don't let the review process hold back a
merge to long. It is every team member's responsibility to be keep the
process quick and smooth within reasonable limits.

It is also a good idea to keep an extra friendly tone in the discussions
to avoid misunderstandings and grief. Use
[emojis](http://www.emoji-cheat-sheet.com/) to keep the discussion fun
and productive.

-   [Understanding the GitHub
    Flow](https://guides.github.com/introduction/flow/index.html)
-   [How GitHub Uses GitHub to Build
    GitHub](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qyz3jkOBbQY)
-   [A Note About Git Commit
    Messages](http://tbaggery.com/2008/04/19/a-note-about-git-commit-messages.html)
-   [Agile Development with Heroku
    Webinar](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y1oNCb-S_aM)

Configuration
-------------

Most applications have some kind of configuration. It can be a
connection URL for a database, API credentials for external services or
something else.

Unix-like operation systems have a great method for providing
applications with configuration values at run time. It is called
[environment
variables](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable). Use this
and store all application configuration as environment variables.

Using environment variables allows for a separation of configuration
from the code base. This makes it easy to change configuration values
for a deployed application without updating any code.

A good goal is that the application can be open sourced at any time
without compromising any credentials.

-   [The twelve-factor app](http://12factor.net/config)
-   [Heroku dev center: Configuration and Config
    Vars](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/config-vars)

Package managers
----------------

All projects have some kind of external dependencies on libraries and
most programming languages have at least one package manager to handle
installation of these. For example ruby has
[bundler](http://bundler.io/) and node.js has
[npm](https://www.npmjs.org/). Use a package manager and be sure to
include the file that specifies package versions in the project.

Go through the dependencies list once in a while and check what packages
have been updated and if the updates might be of interest. For example,
you can do this easily with bundler using the command `bundle outdated`
or with npm using `npm outdated`.

A majority of “good” packages use [semantic
versioning](http://semver.org/). With this you can tell from the version
number if a version is backwards compatible, add new features or just
fixes bugs. Using this you can know what to expect from new versions of
a package.

-   [Package.json dependencies done
    right](http://blog.nodejitsu.com/package-dependencies-done-right)
-   [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/)

Deploy
------

The deploy procedure should be automated so it requires a minimum of
human interaction. With the information from the README and correct
credentials it should be a matter of running a command in the shell or
pressing a button to put a new version of the application online.

Automation is important to avoid human errors. If there are any manual
tasks involved with making a deploy, sooner or later someone will forget
to do them or do them incorrectly. There can be bugs in deploy scripts
but once they are discovered and fixed they will not happen again.

-   [Why Continuous
    Deployment?](http://www.startuplessonslearned.com/2009/06/why-continuous-deployment.html)
-   [Continuous
    delivery](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_delivery)

Application environments
------------------------

An application should be capable of behaving differently depending of
what environment it is running in.

Examples of different behaviours that depend on the current environment
might be how much detail is displayed on error pages, what goes into log
files, javascript minification or if the application should send e-mail
messages. Using environments you get a common way to handle these
special cases.

The default environments are `development`, `test`, `staging` and
`production`. Development is the default mode that the application runs
in when you run it locally. Test is the environment your tests run in.
Staging and production are environments that the application runs in
when deployed. The production environment is where the actual end users
use the application and staging is a replica of production that is used
to test changes before they are pushed to production.

The application picks up what environment to run in from a environment
variable. These are usually called something like `NODE_ENV` or
`RAILS_ENV`.

-   [Beyond the default Rails
    environments](http://signalvnoise.com/posts/3535-beyond-the-default-rails-environments)
-   [The Twelve-Factor App - Dev/prod
    parity](http://12factor.net/dev-prod-parity)

Static files through a CDN
--------------------------

Static files like images, fonts, CSS and javascript for production
applications should not be served from the same server as the
application to end users. Serve these through a CDN that is optimised
for serving static files to ensure high transfer speeds and therefore
increased user happiness.

A common way to solve this is using a CDN with a custom origin set up
and cache busting by file name. With this the application will add the
CDN-host and a hash of the files contents to all files that should be
served through the CDN when run in the production environment.

For example, a stylesheet link tag will look like this in the
development environment:

    <link href="/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">

And like this in production:

    <link href="http://my-cdn.com/style-a06ae46033959f7563b20c5faff6f5e60175253f.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">

When the CDN gets a request for a file it is missing it will request and
cache that file from the application. As the hash is unique to the file
contents the CDN will always fetch the correct version as long as the
app outputs correct links in the markup. This also requires the app to
handle fetching of static files with a hash appended to the filename.
This can be solved by either a simple route rewrite or a precompilation
task run at deploy.

And, remember that Amazon S3 is not CDN. It is a service for storing
files and it is not optimised for delivery. Therefore don't use it as a
CDN. This is a too common misunderstanding.
[CloudFront](http://aws.amazon.com/cloudfront/) is the Amazon CDN
offering.

-   [The Rails Asset
    Pipeline](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html)
-   [connect-assets](https://github.com/adunkman/connect-assets)

Closing thoughts
----------------

All projects are different and of course the practices mentioned in this
post are not valid for all projects. However, keeping a set of common
practices for how to create, maintain and contribute to projects within
an organisation makes things work smoother. It reduces setup time and
makes it easy for new project members to start contributing. Just make
sure that the documentation for your practices is alive and evolves over
time.

**Care about things like this?** We are currently looking for Javascript
and Ruby developers with a keen eye for details to join our team at
[Oktavilla](http://oktavilla.se). [Get in touch if you want to know
more.](mailto:arvid.andersson@oktavilla.se)

*Many thanks to my colleague [Gustaf
Forsslund](https://twitter.com/snurra) for a thorough proofreading of
this blog post.*

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

[![Endorse arvida on
Coderwall](http://api.coderwall.com/arvida/endorsecount.png)](http://coderwall.com/arvida)

[View the discussion
thread.](http://disqus.com/forums/blog-arvidandersson/?url=ref)

[blog comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

This blog is [serious](http://github.com/colszowka/serious).

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.arvidandersson.se/2014/06/17/best-practices-in-modern-web-projects
