[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

One of the Most Amazing Feats in Chess History Just Happened, and No One Noticed
================================================================================

[](#)

[](#)

[](#comments)
[](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AOne%20of%20the%20Most%20Amazing%20Feats%20in%20Chess%20History%20Just%20Happened%2C%20and%20No%20One%20Noticed%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html?wpsrc=sh_all_dt_em_ru)

[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[](#)

[Slate](http://www.slate.com)

[Sports Nut](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut.html)

The stadium scene.

Sept. 18 2014 11:42 AM

Grandmaster Clash
=================

[](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)

[](#comments)

One of the most amazing feats in chess history just happened, and no one noticed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

By [Seth Stevenson](http://www.slate.com/authors.seth_stevenson.html)

[](#comments)

[](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)

[](whatsapp://send?text=One%20of%20the%20Most%20Amazing%20Feats%20in%20Chess%20History%20Just%20Happened%2C%20and%20No%20One%20Noticed%20http%3A%2F%2Fwww.slate.com%2Farticles%2Fsports%2Fsports_nut%2F2014%2F09%2Fsinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html%3Fwpsrc%3Dsh_all_mob_wa_top)

[](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AOne%20of%20the%20Most%20Amazing%20Feats%20in%20Chess%20History%20Just%20Happened%2C%20and%20No%20One%20Noticed%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html?wpsrc=sh_all_mob_em_top)

![140917\_SNUT\_CaruanaCarlsen](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_CaruanaCarlsen.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_CaruanaCarlsen")
Fabiano Caruana plays Magnus Carlsen at the 2014 Sinquefield Cup. The
St. Louis tournament featured one of the strongest fields in chess
history.

Photo by Lennart Ootes

Before any of the six entrants in the [2014 Sinquefield
Cup](http://www.uschesschamps.com/sinquefield-cup) had nudged a white
pawn to e4, they’d already been hailed as the strongest collection of
chess talent ever assembled. The tournament, held in St. Louis, featured
the top three players in the game. The weakest competitor in the field
was the ninth best chess player on the planet.

![140917\_SNUT\_Magnus-square](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_Magnus-square.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_Magnus-square")

Photo illustration by ***Slate***. Photo by Gwladys Fouche/Reuters.

The favorite was current world No. 1 and reigning world champion Magnus
Carlsen. The young Norwegian—who is among the best players in the
history of chess—strolled into the lounge of the St. Louis Chess Club as
the most alluring grandmaster ever, a brilliant, handsome 23-year-old
with a modeling contract for the clothing company G-Star Raw. Forget
about his overmatched foes. If anything could stop Carlsen, his fans
reckoned, it would be the swirl of distractions occupying the parts of
his brain not given over to memorizing
[Nimzo-Indian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nimzo-Indian_Defence)
variations.

As the tournament began on Aug. 27, Carlsen was mired in an ongoing
faceoff with [FIDE](http://www.fide.com/), the international governing
body of chess. There are a few things you should probably know about
FIDE—or the Federation Internationale des Echecs, if you’re feeling
continental. FIDE is, by all accounts, comically corrupt, in the vein of
other fishy global sporting bodies like FIFA and the IOC. Its Russian
president, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, who has hunkered in office for nearly two
decades now, was once abducted by a group of space aliens dressed in
yellow costumes who transported him to a faraway star. Though I am
relying here on Ilyumzhinov’s personal attestations, I have no reason to
doubt him, as this is something about which he has [spoken quite
extensively](http://www.chesshistory.com/winter/extra/ilyumzhinov.html).
He is of the firm belief that [chess was invented by
extraterrestrials](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/kirsan-ilyumzhinov-chess-came-to-earth-from-outer-space-2085838.html),
and further “insists that there is ‘some kind of code’ in chess,
evidence for which he finds in the fact that there are 64 squares on the
chessboard and 64 codons in human DNA.”

One of the many conspiracy theories bandied about in the fever swamps of
the chess world’s collective imagination has it that Ilyumzhinov (and
his friend Vladimir Putin) yearn for a return to the glory of Soviet-era
chess supremacy. Such a shift in the chess world order would require a
demotion of this impudent Norwegian tyke and the promotion of a proper
Russian world champ. Another theory holds that Ilyumzhinov resents
Carlsen for having supported Garry Kasparov when Kasparov launched a
(doomed) campaign to unseat Ilyumzhinov as FIDE president. Whatever the
underlying issues, the upshot is that Carlsen and the governing body
have been squabbling over the Scandinavian’s upcoming FIDE title
defense.

[![Seth
Stevenson](/content/dam/slate/Authors/seth_stevenson-authorbio.png) Seth
Stevenson](http://www.slate.com/authors.seth_stevenson.html)

[Seth Stevenson](http://www.sethstevenson.com/) is a frequent
contributor to ***Slate***. He is the author of *[Grounded: A Down to
Earth Journey Around the
World](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1594484422?ie=UTF8&tag=slatmaga-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1594484422).*

-   [](mailto:seth@sethstevenson.com)
-   [](https://www.facebook.com/stevensonseth)
-   [](https://twitter.com/stevensonseth)
-   [](http://www.slate.com/authors.seth_stevenson.slateplus.html)
-   [](https://plus.google.com/u/0/113727031992686564691/about)

The title belt in chess, as in boxing, may be claimed only by defeating
the reigning champ in an officially sanctioned, one-on-one matchup.
Through a series of qualifying events, FIDE had chosen a challenger for
Carlsen—the current world No. 5 Viswanathan Anand of India, who was not
in St. Louis, and who lost to Carlsen in last year’s title match. FIDE
hoped to host this year’s event in November in the abandoned Olympic
facilities of Sochi on Russia’s Black Sea coast.

Carlsen seemed reluctant to sign on. Rumors swirled in St. Louis that if
he didn’t cave soon, his title might be stripped from him. Some
whispered that he’d already chosen to forfeit, unwilling to accede to
the conditions proffered by FIDE and its alien-obsessed president. FIDE
insisted it could accept Carlsen’s final word on the matter no later
than Sunday, Sept. 7—one day after the last round of the Sinquefield
Cup.

In St. Louis, all of this seemed to be weighing heavily on Carlsen’s
enormous brain. I was invited to cover the tournament with the
enticement that I’d be granted a generous chunk of time with the world
champion. When I arrived, however, he refused to speak to me, even
though doing so violated his contractual appearance obligations. His
manager apologized, explaining in an email, “From time to time we need
to block out all kind of media activities.”

Even without the distraction of talking to me, Carlsen was not playing
to his typical high standards. Meanwhile, one of his rivals was in the
midst of a streak so extraordinary it threatened to overshadow anything
Carlsen had ever done. All of which, in confluence, transformed the
Sinquefield Cup into one of the most emotional, dramatic, newsworthy
chess events of the past 40 years. At most 300 people were in St. Louis
to see it.\
 \

\* \* \*

![140917\_SNUT\_Rex-square](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_Rex-square.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_Rex-square")

Photo illustration by ***Slate***. Photo by Lennart Ootes.

Rex Sinquefield was born with a cleft palate. By the time he was 7, he’d
[lost his father and been left in the care of a St. Louis
orphanage](http://www.stlmag.com/The-Return-of-the-King/). Despite these
humble beginnings, he went on to earn an MBA from the University of
Chicago and, in 1973, to invent what many believe (and he insists) was
the first passively managed, market-weighted S&P 500 index fund.

When Sinquefield retired, his bank account bulging, he returned to St.
Louis—this time in possession of considerably more wealth and influence.
He joined the boards of various charities and cultural institutions, and
backed conservative economic causes. ([Sinquefield is not a big
fan](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052970203897404578078551936968168)
of taxes or teachers unions.) In his spare time he attempted to rescue
American chess.

Sinquefield launched the [Chess Club and Scholastic Center of Saint
Louis](https://saintlouischessclub.org/) in 2008 on a quaint,
brick-laden block in the city’s Central West End neighborhood. The
center has 6,000 square feet of playing halls, libraries, and
classrooms, and more than 1,000 dues-paying members. Across the
street—past a phalanx of outdoor chess tables arranged on the
sidewalk—sits the [World Chess Hall of
Fame](http://www.worldchesshof.org/). Sinquefield apparently dug its
archives out of mothballs from some sad venue in Florida, augmented the
existing collection with his own trove of chess memorabilia, and housed
it all in a gorgeous, dedicated facility replete with a gift shop full
of Bobby Fischer tchotchkes. Not far from here, on the same side of the
city, is Webster University, home to [the nation’s best college chess
team](http://www.webster.edu/spice/chess-team/accomplishments.html).

![St. Louis Chess
Club](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_StLouisChessClub.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_StLouisChessClub")
Students in front of the world’s largest chess piece, outside the World
Chess Hall of Fame in St. Louis.

Photo by Dilip Vishwanat/Getty Images

Together, these institutions have made St. Louis the new center of
American chess. Susan Polgar, among the best female chess players ever,
relocated here to coach the Webster team. Hikaru Nakamura, the current
U.S. No. 1, and No. 7 in the global rankings, moved from Seattle to join
the scene. And now the Sinquefield Cup has become the premier North
American chess event, this year attracting one of the strongest
tournament fields in the game’s modern history.

Sinquefield has built a small, self-contained, chess-loving universe
here. Lester’s, the bar next door to the club, has given over a few of
its TVs to broadcast chess instead of Cardinals games. A pair of live
commentators in the corner of the tavern explicate 15-move opening
sequences as a handful of chess fans chow down on chicken wings. Across
the street at the Hall of Fame, a second set of experts holds court in a
more sedate setting, answering complex questions after each tricky move.
Inside the Chess Club, people have purchased tickets that allow them to
stand in the hushed parlor where the games are played—though complete
silence is required here, and patrons are reminded never to address the
players or to shout out a suggestion for a clever pawn sacrifice. The
fans are mostly (though not all) men, and are invariably shod in the
comfortable, black walking sneakers that are favored among a certain
sort of older person. If you wandered in here by mistake, you might
think you’d stumbled across a pretty decent normcore convention. Albeit
a modest, regional one.

Beyond the velvet rope that cordons off three wooden chessboards and
three accompanying pairs of facing armchairs, the players cut far more
stylish figures. Gone are the chain-smoking Russians who dominated the
chess scene of yore. Modern players work out, staying in shape to boost
their energy levels and mental stamina for long matches.

![140917\_SNUT\_SinquefieldGroup](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_SinquefieldGroup.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_SinquefieldGroup")
The six competitors at the 2014 Sinquefield Cup: Hikaru Nakamura, Magnus
Carlsen, Veselin Topalov, Fabiano Caruana, Levon Aronian, and Maxime
Vachier-Lagrave.

Photo by Lennart Ootes

Levon Aronian, the world No. 2, is a trim, 31-year-old Armenian in
tailored clothes. Sadly, his distinctive eyewear will turn out to be
more remarkable than anything he accomplishes in this tournament. Maxime
Vachier-Lagrave—colloquially known, like many a Frenchman, by his
three-letter monogram—is the weakest here by ranking, though, at 23
years old, MVL still has time to level up. Veselin Topalov, 38, is a
former FIDE champ, but he now clings to world No. 6. The balding
Bulgarian, narrow in face and lapel, is the eldest here by far and is
already contemplating his inevitable fade from the top 10. He’s grown
tired of the travel and the time spent away from his family. He doesn’t
have the same thirst to study the game anymore, to keep up with new
trends. “I don’t know what I’ll do,” he told me in a quiet moment when I
asked him about his retirement plans. “I’m not going to show little kids
how to move the pieces around. I’ll have to think about it.”

![140917\_SNUT\_Nakamura-square](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_Nakamura-square.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_Nakamura-square")

Photo illustration by ***Slate***. Photo by Anna Solvova/isifa/Getty
Images.

The lone American entrant is Nakamura, a 26-year-old who often chugs Red
Bull at the chessboard. Though he is ranked seventh in the world, he
seems to consider himself Magnus Carlsen’s chief rival, as evidenced by
this November 2013 tweet in which he equates Carlsen with a mythological
necromancer.

> Starting to realize that I am the only person who is going to be able
> to stop Sauron in the context of chess history.
>
> — Hikaru Nakamura (@GMHikaru) [November 19,
> 2013](https://twitter.com/GMHikaru/status/402632662663176192)

It’s a bold pronouncement coming from a man with a record of 0–11 (plus
15 draws) against the champ. Carlsen, for his part, seems less than
threatened. In an interview with a Norwegian media outlet, he once
referred to Nakamura as—I believe this was correctly translated—“inept.”

By the midpoint of the tournament, Nakamura has dug a prodigious hole
for himself, with two losses, three draws, and zero wins. He’s prone to
vivid facial expressions, and when he realizes he’s made an error he
will bite his lip, shake his head, and stare vacantly at the board.
After an especially egregious cascade of mistakes during a match against
Aronian, the commentators on the online live stream described Nakamura’s
position as “a terrible mess” and “simply bad.” Broadcaster Jen Shahade
(a chess and poker player of some fame, and the author of the memoir
[*Chess Bitch*](http://www.amazon.com/dp/189008509X/?tag=slatmaga-20))
asked, in what seemed to be genuine disbelief, “This is too weak to be
something that he’d prepared in advance, right?” Meanwhile, on the
screen behind her, Nakamura could be seen engaging in an amazing
sequence of reactions as his fate dawned upon him: puffing out his
cheeks; raising his eyebrows and exhaling sharply; turning away from the
board in disgust; glancing back in a last-ditch glimmer of hope that,
wait, hey, maybe I’ve spotted a miracle move but no, never mind, no of
course I haven’t; and finally burying his face in his hands in a display
of utter capitulation.

It may have been a teensy comfort to Nakamura to know that even the
mighty Carlsen had managed just a single win in his first five games.
Everyone in St. Louis agreed that the world championship negotiations
were nibbling at the Norwegian’s mind. He wasn’t playing crisply.

The Sinquefield Cup—maybe the strongest chess tournament ever—drew fewer
ticket buyers than an indie rock show.

Professional chess requires a level of peak mental alertness that most
of us achieve only in the throes of searing tooth pain. And that level
of heightened concentration must be sustained over the course of a four-
or five-hour game. A grandmaster needs to execute 50 or 60 consecutive
moves without making a single damaging error. He must recall appropriate
countermeasures for dozens of possible gambits and subtle iterations of
those gambits, all under the pressure of a ticking, pitiless clock.
([Time limits in chess are
confusing](http://www.fide.com/component/handbook/?id=39&view=category),
but typically the players have 90 minutes total to make their first 40
moves. Beyond that point, it gets more complicated.)

Carlsen is known for vise-like gameplay in which he constricts the life
from his opponents, slowly turning a minor positional advantage into a
major one with an endless series of patient, precise moves. Whether it’s
the distraction of regular bargaining sessions with a man who believes
that chess was invented by space aliens, or something else, Carlsen
wasn’t himself here.

Carlsen is the only active chess player in the world whom someone other
than chess geeks might recognize. That’s partly due to his accolades
(grandmaster at 13; simultaneous world champion of standard chess, rapid
chess, and blitz chess; highest-rated player of all motherfreaking
*time*) and partly due to some external factors (a Western not Soviet
upbringing; his excellent spoken English; his Viking bone structure,
fjord-colored eyes, and hay bale of hair). Carlsen is followed
everywhere he goes by a small Norwegian news team captained by a
beautiful blonde woman who interviews the champ on camera after every
one of his matches. He’s arguably the biggest international celebrity in
a 10-mile radius. Maybe 20.

Yet, by day five of the Sinquefield Cup, Carlsen was an afterthought.
Something bigger was happening.

\* \* \*

![140917\_SNUT\_Caruana-square](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_Caruana-square.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_Caruana-square")

Photo illustration by ***Slate***. Photo by Lennart Ootes.

Fabiano Caruana learned to play chess [at a synagogue in Park Slope,
Brooklyn](http://en.chessbase.com/post/who-was-the-future-gm-fabiano-caruana-italy-s-top-grandmaster).
At 14, he became the youngest U.S.–born grandmaster. By that point, he’d
already relocated to Italy, holing up closer to Europe’s top-level
coaches and tournaments. Now 22 years old—he’s nearly two years younger
than Carlsen—Caruana has been steadily climbing the FIDE rankings, and
entered the Sinquefield Cup as the No. 3 player in the world.

Caruana started the tournament with a win, then another. Then another.
And another. And another. At the halfway mark, when each player had
faced all five of his opponents exactly once, Caruana was 5–0–0.
Carlsen, meanwhile, was tied with Topalov in a distant second place,
recording one win, one loss, and three draws. Players get no points for
a loss, a half-point for a draw, and one point for a win. Given
Caruana’s 2.5-point lead, many observers believed the tournament was
essentially over.

To you and me, going unbeaten and undrawn in five straight tournament
games sounds impressive. But to chess aficionados, Caruana’s performance
is nigh on miraculous. It’s frightfully difficult to straight-up stomp
another top-10 international grandmaster. If he’s determined to, and
particularly if he’s playing with the white pieces (white goes first,
and thus bestows an advantage by allowing you to dictate early play), a
super-elite player can choose a cautious approach and quite reasonably
expect to engineer a draw. Yet Caruana wasn’t merely avoiding draws and
losses. In the words of one commentator, he was “spanking” his
opponents.

There were, to be sure, elements of good fortune involved. When Caruana
faced Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, with MVL playing black, the Frenchman
unveiled a surprise opening sequence that backfired spectacularly. MVL
is widely known to play the [Sicilian
Defense](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sicilian_Defence), which meant
that after Caruana began the game by moving the pawn in front of his
king two spaces forward (that’s pawn to e4, one of the standard first
moves in modern play), everyone presumed that MVL would move the black
pawn sitting in front of his queenside bishop two spaces forward in
response (pawn to c5). On this day, atypically, MVL eschewed the
Sicilian and moved that same pawn only one square forward—pawn to c6—a
technique known as the [Caro-Kann
defense](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caro%E2%80%93Kann_Defence).
Amazingly, that one square changes everything. Caruana hadn’t
anticipated it. He had, though, studied this same opening during his
preparation for a different match, against a different foe, four months
prior.

“It was an unfortunate choice that my opponent made,” Caruana told me.
“I’d looked at that same line some months ago. I’d prepared it for a
different player and it just caught the wrong guy.”

Many of us have difficulty remembering shopping lists with four items on
them. Caruana retrieved, from study sessions many moons and moves ago, a
specific sequence of about 17 decisions necessary to defeat MVL’s
sortie. As the Frenchman continued to play out the Caro-Kann sequence,
Caruana executed his countermoves without a flub, making nuanced
modifications in response to MVL’s own subtle variations.

Top-level grandmasters, of course, pull off this sort of thing
routinely. But Caruana is earning a reputation as the most prepared
player of his era—a man who studies everything and forgets nothing.

When I asked him about his hobbies outside of chess, he smiled and
allowed that he basically has none. He watches movies to relax (he
particularly enjoyed the Indonesian martial arts films *The Raid* and
*The Raid 2*) and sometimes reads (he mentioned his fondness for *The
Iliad* and David Sedaris). But mostly, he stares at chess games.

![140917\_SNUT\_CaruanaNakamura](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_CaruanaNakamura.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_CaruanaNakamura")
Caruana vs. Nakamura at the 2014 Sinquefield Cup.

Photo by Lennart Ootes

“Hundreds of games are played each day all around the world,” he noted,
in a voice that is oddly deep and authoritative given his slight frame
and wispy moustache. “And a lot of them are important. They’re all
available online, but you have to put in the time to look at them all.
And you need to analyze, find new trends, keep trying to find new ideas
to use against specific opponents.”

On the third day of the tournament, Caruana beat Carlsen using the black
pieces. It was his third straight win, and the moment when the chess
world began to focus on St. Louis with even greater interest. This,
again, was a win birthed in preparation. “At some point he sacrificed a
piece,” says Caruana of Carlsen. “It was an interesting sacrifice, even
if it may not have been totally correct. But it turned the game into a
very complicated one, almost immediately. And it turns out that I was
better prepared for the complications. I outplayed him, and at the end
he made a terrible move. He blundered. Although at that point it was
probably already a win for me. But still, he could have put up a lot
more resistance than he did.” (You can view the game, and more detailed
analysis, on the website [*The Week in
Chess*](http://www.theweekinchess.com/chessnews/events/2nd-sinquefield-cup-2014/caruana-beats-carlsen-to-move-to-33-in-sinquefield-cup).)

If there’s a rap on Carlsen, it’s that he’s the anti-Caruana: He doesn’t
prepare as diligently as he could. With his openings, he seems content
to let the game wander where it will, feeling secure enough in his
ability that he believes he can mold any position into a victory. “It’s
as though he serves underhand to just get the point started,” says
analyst and grandmaster Ian Rogers, “because he knows he can beat you in
the rally. But Caruana has the booming serve.”

When asked to describe Carlsen’s play, Caruana raved about the
Norwegian’s tenacity. “When he has an advantage he almost never lets it
go. Where other players are maybe ready to accept a draw and go home,
he's ready to work the extra two, three hours and convert his advantage,
even if it's a really tiny one.” Caruana also confessed that he tries to
“avoid” certain types of games against Carlsen. “In some positions you
can't compete with him. Certain pawn structures he just plays like a
machine. There are certain openings where I say, ‘I just can't do that.’
But OK, certain positions he's not as comfortable with. Just like any
player, he can also play unconfidently.”

“There’s always been a higher chess truth which is pretty much
impossible to grasp.”

Fabiano Caruana

Caruana oozed confidence when he sat down with me on the rest day at the
tournament’s halfway mark. You’d be confident, too, if you’d just
destroyed the world’s best competition in a contest measuring the
highest intellectual capabilities of humankind. Caruana is, on the
whole, very respectful of his opponents, but his matter-of-fact tone
suggested some deeply internalized assumptions about his own
awesomeness. On Topalov: “I think that he’s not at his peak any more,
his chess strength has declined a bit.” On the match with Carlsen: “It
went very well for me from the start. … I outplayed him.”

Confidence can have interesting effects in high-level chess. When your
opponent plays very quickly, it not only adds an element of time
pressure (your clock begins to run the moment he finishes moving) but
can also intimidate you into believing that he’s supremely well prepared
for the approach you’ve taken. Which in turn might convince you to zag
away from your planned course out of fear that you’re walking into a
trap (which you may well be). In St. Louis, Caruana perched over the
board with visible self-assurance, keeping up a terrifying pace of play.
In part it’s because he really was prepared for everything his foes
threw at him. But the effect snowballed. He got in their heads.

By the time Caruana won his fifth straight game to open the tournament,
destroying Nakamura while playing with black, the commentators were
struggling to situate this performance in historical context. Some
brought up [Anatoly Karpov’s run at Linares in
1994](http://www.chessgames.com/perl/chesscollection?cid=1003311), when
he won his first six tournament games (including one against a
then-babyfaced Topalov) before Garry Kasparov at last slowed him down
with a draw. There was also a magical Viktor Korchnoi showing in the
1968 tournament in Wijk aan Zee, Netherlands. But many think the field
in St. Louis is stronger than those Karpov and Korchnoi faced. And
Caruana was still going. Were he to win all 10 games without a blemish,
it would likely be considered the greatest feat in the annals of
tournament chess, stretching back to the 1800s.

I asked some experts to explain, to a layman, what sort of
accomplishment it would be to go on a 10–0 run here. When not reaching
for analogies from other sports—one grandmaster, in complete
earnestness, likened it to pitching 100 straight innings of no-hit
baseball—they invariably turned to Bobby Fischer. Fischer’s streak of 20
consecutive victories against grandmasters. Fischer’s mindblowing
tournament performances. Fischer’s near-hallucinatory leaps of chess
logic. Stumped for further superlatives with which to describe Caruana’s
excellence, one chess expert resorted to the highest possible praise:
Caruana, he said, was “Fischer-esque.”

\* \* \*

The 1972 FIDE title match in Reykjavik, Iceland, pitted Fischer, the
American challenger, against Russian champion Boris Spassky. A series of
Soviets had held the FIDE crown since 1948. There had not yet been an
American-born champion.

Fischer was an eccentric, livewire personality. He lost the first game
to Spassky, and then forfeited the second without even moving a
piece—citing annoyance with the television cameras. Experts left him for
dead. They figured he simply wasn’t up to the moment.

![Boris Spassky and Bobby Fischer, Iceland
1972](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_SpasskyFischer.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_SpasskyFischer")
Boris Spassky and Bobby Fischer play in Reykjavik, Iceland on Aug. 31,
1972.

Photo by J.W. Green/AP Images

In the [third
game](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Chess_Championship_1972#Game_3:_Spassky_0_Fischer_1_.28Modern_Benoni.29),
with his 11^th^ move, Fischer played Nh5—meaning he moved his centrally
positioned black knight to the edge of the board. This went against a
lot of standard chess wisdom. For one thing, knights are generally more
powerful when they can lash out in myriad directions from a middle
square. Even beginners know the rule of thumb: “a knight on the rim is
dim.” But more puzzlingly, the choice allowed Spassky to destroy
Fischer’s kingside pawn formation. The result looked to be awful,
perhaps close to fatal, in the long run. But it had positional
advantages that weren't obvious at first glance. Spassky slowly grew
flummoxed, and resigned. It was the first time Fischer had ever beaten
him. The tide turned and Fischer went on to take the championship.

His victory was akin to the U.S. Olympic hockey team’s subsequent upset
of the USSR in the 1980 Winter Olympics—both in its shock value, and in
the fact that its cultural importance cannot be understood by anyone who
grew up after the Cold War. The surrounding hoopla birthed a whole
generation of American chess nerds. The gift shop in the World Chess
Hall of Fame sells T-shirts that say, simply, “Nh5,” with those three
characters superimposed over a silhouetted map of Iceland.

The chess craze that followed in the wake of that 1972 world
championship match is now referred to as “the Fischer boom.” It was
without doubt the peak moment for the game in America. Fischer appeared
on the covers of *Sports Illustrated*, *Life*, and *Time* (the latter of
which featured the American hero [in the guise of a chess
piece](http://img.timeinc.net/time/magazine/archive/covers/1972/1101720731_400.jpg)).
Kids in Ohio bought [*My 60 Memorable
Games*](http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00AR39W0O/?tag=slatmaga-20) and
learned how to fianchetto.

Those days are long gone. Six years after Fischer’s death—his greatness
sullied by [a late-life torrent of anti-Semitic, anti-American
rambling](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/19/crosswords/chess/19fischer.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0)—chess
remains a useful cultural referent, our go-to metaphor for strategic
thinking. ([A recent cover of
the*Economist*](http://www.economist.com/printedition/covers/2014-09-04/e-eu-la-me-na-uk)
showed Vladimir Putin walking amid giant, toppled chess pieces. The
accompanying story was not about chess.) Movie set designers will
forever place chessboards in the lairs of villains and on the bunk beds
of child prodigies. But the game itself has dwindled in popularity.
Chances are you didn’t tune in to the live stream of last year’s title
fight between Carlsen and Anand. Chances are your 12-year-old nephew
hasn’t begged you for a copy of [Aron Nimzowitsch’s *My
System*](http://www.amazon.com/dp/1880673851/?tag=slatmaga-20).

If there’s been any recent hope for a chess resurgence, it’s rested
entirely on Carlsen’s broad shoulders. Young, good-looking, non-Russian,
and blessed with genuinely transcendent skill, he’s the most marketable
player to arrive on the chess scene this century. While at the table, he
wears jackets and shirts emblazoned with the logos of his sponsors, like
he’s a NASCAR driver: Nordic Semiconductor on his shoulder, Simonsen
Vogt Wiig, a large Norwegian law firm, on his breast.

![140917\_SNUT\_FischerCovers](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_FischerCovers.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_FischerCovers")

Photo illustration by***Slate***.

There will always be a core of diehard chess fans, but, Magnus or no
Magnus, the wider interest isn’t there right now. The Sinquefield
Cup—maybe the strongest chess tournament ever—drew fewer ticket buyers
than an indie rock show. On a Tuesday when I was there, there seemed to
be no more than 100 people in attendance. I was the only mainstream,
non-chess journalist covering the event, save for the aforementioned
Norwegians. The online broadcast drew about 75,000 worldwide viewers per
day, which sounds respectable. Until you learn that the stream of a
“League of Legends” videogame championship [attracted an audience of 32
million](http://www.theverge.com/2013/11/19/5123724/league-of-legends-world-championship-32-million-viewers).
Televised poker, another “mindsport,” is all over cable TV and has
launched a galaxy of star players. Chess has had no comparable
successes.

Is the product the problem? Like poker, chess doesn’t offer up electric
visuals. It is a still life of men seated at a table, hands pressed to
the sides of their heads. But while poker is, at heart, a simple game,
easy enough to grok that you can strategize along with Phil Ivey when he
plays on TV, a grandmaster-level chess match is totally bewildering. The
live stream commentators attempt to explain the thinking behind each
move, and after a while you glean a basic understanding of what makes a
position strong or weak, the value of developing your bishop here
instead of there, and why a particular pawn is so vital to protect. But
most of us will never manage even a rudimentary comprehension of the
cogitations going on in these analytical geniuses’ brains. I might beat
Ivey in a hand or two of poker, but the only way I’d beat a grandmaster
in a game of chess is if I managed to swipe his pieces off the board
when he wasn’t looking.

The rise of the computer chess engine may also have dimmed the game’s
appeal. Just as my brain is hopelessly puny next to Magnus Carlsen’s, so
is Carlsen’s compared to that of a modern chess-playing machine. In the
last two decades—starting with [Kasparov’s loss to IBM’s Deep
Blue](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_Blue_versus_Garry_Kasparov) in
1997—it’s become clear that even the greatest chess minds are helpless
against a hard drive. A computer can play a move that appears wholly
nonsensical, only to watch it pay off later in a manner that the human
brain couldn’t possibly foresee. Computers never tire or lose focus,
never let emotion cloud their decisions, never get intimidated by their
opponents’ quick, confident play. In a recent demonstration, Hikaru
Nakamura failed to beat a powerful chess engine, even when he was
allowed to consult a slightly less powerful chess engine. Ian Rogers
spoke to me with reverent awe about watching a linked group of
mainframes trade elegant moves in a way that an angel might play chess,
if we could sit an angel in front of a chessboard. His recollection was
that these computers had been retired soon after and were put to work
running Dubai’s metro system or something.

![Garry
Kasparov](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_DeepBlue.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_DeepBlue")
Garry Kasparov takes on IBM's Deep Blue in 1997. The computer beat the
world champion, 3.5–2.5.

Photo by Stan Honda/AFP/Getty Images

Maybe it takes a little shine off the game, knowing the strongest
possible contest would pit two CPUs against each other. Yet we still
enjoy watching Usain Bolt run, even though he can’t outsprint one of
Google’s driverless cars. There is still a certain drama inherent in
watching two people scale the heights of human potential, in competition
with each other, battling nerves and fatigue. Though it is all a bit
more exciting when those two people are representing the USA and the
USSR in 1972.

Though computers make the players’ abilities seem worse by comparison,
they’ve actually made them much stronger in absolute terms. A
grandmaster can now check his instincts against the more empirical
analysis of the engines. Some of the eccentric moves that worked for
chess stars in the past wouldn’t fly against the honed, icy cold
calculations of a Carlsen or a Caruana. And, reassuringly, the computers
don’t know everything. They haven’t yet “solved” chess—meaning they
don’t have an objectively perfect move figured out for every possible
scenario. The game’s too complicated, even for them. As Caruana said to
me, quite poetically I thought, “There’s always been a higher chess
truth, which is pretty much impossible to grasp. Because there are too
many moves. There are too many possibilities.”

“We’re gonna need to start calling him Fabiano Fischer.”

Maurice Ashley

The goat rodeo that is FIDE, with its corruption and its hidebound ways,
does the game no favors. It makes little sense for Carlsen to have a
world championship rematch against the world’s fifth-ranked player, as
would be the case if the Norwegian acceded to FIDE’s wishes and faced
Anand. My friend Matt Gaffney—a national master and an occasional
contributor to ***Slate***—has [proposed an alternative system of four
major
tournaments](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2013/11/the_world_chess_championship_is_an_embarrassing_anachronism_it_s_time_to.html),
doing away with the head-to-head world championship match entirely and
replacing it with something akin to the four grand slams of golf or
tennis. In between those major events, accumulated rankings points would
tell us who’s No. 1. Everyone I spoke to in St. Louis favored this idea.
Nakamura brought up Gaffney’s essay unprompted the moment I mentioned I
was writing for ***Slate***, and said he’d read it and agreed with it
wholeheartedly.

Maurice Ashley—a grandmaster and one of the commentators in St.
Louis—has his own novel idea to juice up the game. He’s holding the
[Millionaire Chess Open](http://millionairechess.com/) in Las Vegas next
month, the chess world’s answer to the World Series of Poker. The WSOP
allows anyone to enter—so long as you pony up the entrance fee, you can
sit at the table with the best players in the world and maybe bluff them
once or twice. Likewise, for a $1,000 buy-in, anyone can enter the
Millionaire Chess Open and take aim at a slice of its $1 million prize
pool. There will be grandmasters there, and also some folks who barely
know their Ruy Lopez from their Queen’s Gambit. Spots are still open in
Vegas, if that’s the kind of mating you’re contemplating. If I go, it
won’t be to play—it’ll be to bet heavily against amateurs like you.

\* \* \*

Caruana won his sixth game against Topalov, and then his seventh in a
rematch with MVL. He remained undefeated and undrawn. Onlookers couldn’t
believe this was happening.

“He’s not making any mistakes,” said a shell-shocked MVL in a post-game
interview. “It’s the most amazing thing I’ve seen by quite some margin.”

“We’re gonna need to start calling him Fabiano Fischer,” suggested
Maurice Ashley. One of the live stream commentators theorized “chess
fans in the future will ask each other, ‘Where were you in September
2014?’ ”

In his eighth game, Caruana came up against Carlsen. The Norwegian
played the black pieces this time, and thus was at a disadvantage. But
you could sense that the champ had seen enough from his new, younger
rival. Carlsen, employing an unexpected Accelerated Dragon defense, fell
behind early but then managed to work a draw. Caruana’s streak of
outright victories was over. “It's an amazing result,” said Carlsen in a
post-match interview with Sinquefield Cup commentators. “Even if he
doesn't turn up for the last two games, it would be [one of the greatest
of our
time](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/fabiano-caruana-is-doing-the-impossible-at-chesss-most-competitive-tournament/).”

Caruana did show up, drawing his final two games to win the tournament
(and its $100,000 top prize) with a record of 7-0-3, getting 8.5 points
out of a possible 10. His victory at the Sinquefield Cup earned Caruana
the [highest tournament performance rating of all
time](https://twitter.com/top40chess/status/508373748672892928),
crushing even Karpov’s legendary result at Linares. Earth’s finest chess
players couldn’t manage to pin Caruana with a single loss. As a result,
he vaulted past Aronian in the real-time rankings to become No. 2 in the
world. (Carlsen finished in second place in St. Louis, three points
behind Caruana, with a record of 2–1–7.) Rumor has it that U.S. chess
interests are now trying to convince the U.S.-born Caruana, who now
represents Italy, to compete as an American in international tournaments
like the Chess Olympiad. “For the moment, I can't discuss if anything is
going on,” he responded when I asked him about the possibility. “It's
private.”

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_champion_fabiano_caruana_chats_with_seth_stevenson_about.html?wpsrc=sp_all_article_storypromo)

A Slate Plus Special Feature:

“It’s Not Everyday That You Can Beat the World Champion”

![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/Slate%20Plus/articles/2014/09/140918_PLUS_SethChess_590x421.jpg.CROP.promo-small2.jpg)

Slate Plus members can listen to the exclusive interview with chess
grandmaster Fabiano Caruana here. Try Slate Plus for two weeks for free!
****

\* \* \*

The day after the tournament closed, Magnus Carlsen made his
long-awaited decision. He would [play in Sochi in November against
Anand](http://www.theweekinchess.com/chessnews/politics/carlsen-will-defend-his-world-title-in-sochi-against-anand-in-november)
after all, just as FIDE had demanded.

![Anand vs
Carlsen](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_AnandCarlsen.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_AnandCarlsen")
Viswanathan Anand and Magnus Carlsen played for the chess world
championship in 2013, with Carlsen winning 6.5–3.5. They will face each
other this November in Sochi, Russia.

Photo by Manjunath Kiran/AFP/Getty Images

Other than a possible general distaste for the way FIDE operates, why
had Carlsen stalled? According to chess insiders, he: 1) was unhappy
with the size of FIDE’s prize purse, which had shrunk considerably since
the previous title event; 2) wasn’t altogether thrilled about the
security situation in Russia, given the brink-teetering possibility of a
hot war with NATO; 3) was maybe less than psyched to spend a fortnight
in a [barren, crumbling, Slavic ghost
town](http://roadsandkingdoms.com/2014/sochi-abandoned/); 4) was not 100
percent clear about who, precisely, would be funding the event.

This last concern mattered. Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, the
extra-terrestrial-philic FIDE president, had at one point suggested the
championship could be bankrolled by Alexander Tkachyov, governor of
Russia’s Krasnodar region. Tkachyov has managed to secure himself a spot
on an EU blacklist by dint of his role in “[undermining Ukraine's
sovereignty](http://www.cnbc.com/id/101868927).” He is under
sanction—meaning a travel ban and an asset freeze. Were Carlsen to
accept Tkachyov’s dirty rubles, the blowback from goodhearted fellow
Norwegians, from politically savvy Western chess fans, and, not least,
from disapproving EU officials, might sully the youthful grandmaster’s
image.

I asked Carlsen’s manager whether he’d gotten clarification about who
would be paying. He responded in an email, “Regarding the money to
fund/sponsor the event, we must trust FIDE to be in control. We expect
that their finances will be in accordance to international agreements,
laws and regulations.” FIDE answered my emailed questions thusly:
“Alexander Tkachyov or any other persons sanctioned by the EU or the
U.S. are not providing any funds for the match. All sponsorship
contracts will be reviewed by FIDE.” The show will go on.

![Kirsan
Ilyumzhinov](/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_Ilyumzhinov-2014.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140917_SNUT_Ilyumzhinov-2014")
FIDE’s extra-terrestrial-philic president, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov.

Photo by Rune Stoltz Bertinussen/AFP/Getty Images

It may be that Carlsen received the assurances he needed. It may be that
he felt Caruana inching toward his crown, and felt an urge to reassert
himself as the champ. Either way, I encourage you to tune in for some of
the championship series in Sochi, or for Caruana’s next live-streamed
match. Perhaps you’ll get swept up in the beauty of this 1,500-year-old
pastime. Start to learn a few openings. Maybe some defenses. Eventually
yearn to execute a perfect smothered mate.

It really is a seductive game. At one point during the Sinquefield Cup,
I was watching from a quiet viewing lounge on the first floor of the
chess club. I glanced over to my left and saw a man sitting alone. It
was Rex Sinquefield. I tried to make conversation, but he politely
brushed me off. He was utterly focused on watching Caruana play. An
orphan turned plutocrat, now transformed back into a little boy watching
his favorite game.

I suddenly realized that he’d created this institution, funded this
tournament, flown these grandmasters here and housed them, out of the
purest, simplest love imaginable. He may not have lured droves of
spectators to the event, and may not have reignited the world’s love
affair with chess. But for two weeks at least, he helped the world’s
most storied game flourish as it once had, with dedicated fans
witnessing an incandescent burst of greatness that seemed to come from
nowhere.

But maybe we shouldn’t have been surprised to see something we’d never
seen before. And by the same measure, maybe we can’t predict what the
future holds for chess. After all, any dedicated student—and Rex
Sinquefield is one—can tell you that there are more potential variations
in a single chess game than there are atoms in our observable
universe.****

[REPRINT](http://www.slatereprints.com/reprint-products-quote-request/?cf2_field_17=http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html&cf2_field_18=www.slate.com&cf2_field_19=One+of+the+Most+Amazing+Feats+in+Chess+History+Just+Happened%2C+and+No+One+Noticed&cf2_field_20=09%2F20%2F2013)
[PRINT](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.single.html?print)
[EMAIL](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AOne%20of%20the%20Most%20Amazing%20Feats%20in%20Chess%20History%20Just%20Happened%2C%20and%20No%20One%20Noticed%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html?wpsrc=sh_all_dt_em_bot)

[](#) [](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)

[](#comments)

[](#comments)

[](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)

[](whatsapp://send?text=One%20of%20the%20Most%20Amazing%20Feats%20in%20Chess%20History%20Just%20Happened%2C%20and%20No%20One%20Noticed%20http%3A%2F%2Fwww.slate.com%2Farticles%2Fsports%2Fsports_nut%2F2014%2F09%2Fsinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html%3Fwpsrc%3Dsh_all_mob_wa_bot)

[](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AOne%20of%20the%20Most%20Amazing%20Feats%20in%20Chess%20History%20Just%20Happened%2C%20and%20No%20One%20Noticed%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html?wpsrc=sh_all_mob_em_bot)

[Most Read](#)

-   [1. I Bought the Huge iPhone. I'm Already Thinking of Returning
    It.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html)
-   [2. One of the Most Amazing Feats in Chess History Just Happened,
    and No One
    Noticed](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)
-   [3. The Most Terrifying Thing About
    Ebola](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html)
-   [4. ESPN Story Alleges Ravens, NFL Are Scapegoating Ray Rice in
    Cover-Up](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/19/ray_rice_ravens_purposeful_misdirection_new_story_says.html)
-   [5. A Huge Discovery About Prime Numbers Just Won This Mathematician
    a MacArthur
    Fellowship](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/do_the_math/2013/05/yitang_zhang_twin_primes_conjecture_a_huge_discovery_about_prime_numbers.html)

Most Shared

-   [1. I Bought the Huge iPhone. I'm Already Thinking of Returning
    It.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html)
-   [2. Why Men Never Remember
    Anything](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/why_men_never_remember_anything_the_gender_divide_in_memory_recollection.html)
-   [3. These Are the *Mystery Science Theater 3000* Episodes You Should
    Watch This
    Weekend](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/mystery_science_theater_3000_on_vimeo_10_best_mst3k_episodes_to_watch_of.html)
-   [4. Apple Pants Are the Perfect Accessory for the Giant New
    iPhones](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/apple_pants_apparel_for_oversize_iphone_6_and_iphone_6_plus.html)
-   [5. Shonda Rhimes Is Not an “Angry Black Woman,” *New York Times*.
    Neither Are Her
    Characters.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/shonda_rhimes_an_angry_black_woman_wrong_new_york_times_she_is_so_much_more.html)

![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/video/2014/TNC14091901-Maven-Still.jpg.CROP.hd-large.jpg)
[To Mars,
Again](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/mars_maven_arrival_nasa_mission_will_investigate_mars_climate.html?wpisrc=seg_video)

Load Comments

[Powered by Livefyre](http://livefyre.com)

### TODAY IN SLATE

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html)

Medical Examiner

The Most Terrifying Thing About Ebola
=====================================

The disease threatens humanity by preying on humanity.

By Benjamin Hale

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html)
Medical Examiner

Sept. 19 2014 12:13 PM The Most Terrifying Thing About Ebola The disease
threatens humanity by preying on humanity. Benjamin Hale

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html)

I Bought the Huge iPhone. I’m Already Thinking of Returning It.
===============================================================

By Will Oremus

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html)
Future Tense

Sept. 19 2014 6:31 PM I Bought the Huge iPhone. I’m Already Thinking of
Returning It. Will Oremus

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2014/09/scotland_votes_to_remain_in_united_kingdom_expect_more_political_earthquakes.html)

Scotland Is Just the Beginning. Expect More Political Earthquakes in Europe.
============================================================================

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2014/09/scotland_votes_to_remain_in_united_kingdom_expect_more_political_earthquakes.html)
Foreigners

Sept. 19 2014 1:56 PM Scotland Is Just the Beginning. Expect More
Political Earthquakes in Europe. Expect more political earthquakes
across Europe.

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/inside_higher_ed/2014/09/college_football_isn_t_attracting_the_audience_it_used_to.html)

Students Aren’t Going to College Football Games as Much Anymore
===============================================================

And schools are getting worried.

By Jake New

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/inside_higher_ed/2014/09/college_football_isn_t_attracting_the_audience_it_used_to.html)
Inside Higher Ed

Sept. 19 2014 1:34 PM Students Aren’t Going to College Football Games as
Much Anymore And schools are getting worried. Jake New

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/people_s_climate_march_protesters_sound_alarm_on_climate_change.html)

![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/people_s_climate_march_protesters_sound_alarm_on_climate_change/455863396-people-organize-to-march-in-the-peoples-climate-march.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

160 Countries Host Marches to Demand Action on Climate Change
=============================================================

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/people_s_climate_march_protesters_sound_alarm_on_climate_change.html)
The Slatest

Sept. 21 2014 1:22 PM Protesters Take to the Streets to Sound Alarm on
Climate Change in New York, Across the World

[THE SLATEST](/blogs/the_slatest.html) [SEE
ALL](/blogs/the_slatest.html)

-   [Protesters Take to the Streets to Sound Alarm on Climate Change in
    New York, Across the
    World](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/people_s_climate_march_protesters_sound_alarm_on_climate_change.html)
-   [Knife-Carrying White House Jumper is Vet who Feared “Atmosphere Was
    Collapsing”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/omar_gonzalez_white_house_jumper_had_knife_is_iraq_war_veteran.html)
-   [North Korea: American Sentenced to Hard Labor Wanted to Become
    “Second
    Snowden”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/20/matthew_todd_miller_north_korea_says_imprisoned_american_wanted_to_become.html)
-   [Almost One in Four Americans Support Idea of Splitting From the
    Union](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/20/one_in_four_americans_support_idea_of_splitting_from_the_union.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/blacks_and_corporal_punishment_why_we_invent_black_pathologies.html)

Politics

Blacks Don’t Have a Corporal Punishment Problem
===============================================

Americans do. But when blacks exhibit the same behaviors as others, it
becomes part of a greater black pathology.

By Jamelle Bouie

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/blacks_and_corporal_punishment_why_we_invent_black_pathologies.html)
Politics

Sept. 19 2014 6:22 PM Blacks Don’t Have a Corporal Punishment Problem
Americans do. But when blacks exhibit the same behaviors as others, it
becomes part of a greater black pathology. Jamelle Bouie

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/18/chelsea_manning_s_byline_sketch_criticizing_it_partakes_in_transmisogyny.html)

Why a Sketch of Chelsea Manning Is Stirring Up Controversy
==========================================================

By Tyler Lopez
[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/19/russia_and_eastern_europe_how_worried_should_poland_the_baltic_states_and.html)

How Worried Should Poland, the Baltic States, and Georgia Be About a Russian Invasion?
======================================================================================

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/19/russia_and_eastern_europe_how_worried_should_poland_the_baltic_states_and.html)
The World

Sept. 19 2014 12:33 PM How Worried Should Poland, the Baltic States, and
Georgia Be About a Russian Invasion?

[Men Never Remember Anything, and Science Knows
Why](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/why_men_never_remember_anything_the_gender_divide_in_memory_recollection.html?wpisrc=hpsponsoredd2)

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/why_men_never_remember_anything_the_gender_divide_in_memory_recollection.html)
Trending News Channel

Sept. 19 2014 1:11 PM Watch Flashes of Lightning Created in a Lab Slate
V Staff

[This Is All That’s Left of New York’s Once-Thriving Borscht
Belt](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/19/marisa_scheinfeld_photographs_old_hotels_in_the_catskill_mountains_in_her.html?wpisrc=hpsponsoredd2)

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/19/marisa_scheinfeld_photographs_old_hotels_in_the_catskill_mountains_in_her.html)
Behold

Sept. 19 2014 11:51 AM An Up-Close Look at the U.S.–Mexico Border Alyssa
Coppelman

[Denny’s Cocktail Menu Is Elaborate and Legit. I Tried
It.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/denny_s_drinks_menu_new_york_city_restaurant_has_superfluously_good_cocktails.html?wpisrc=hpsponsoredd2)

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/denny_s_drinks_menu_new_york_city_restaurant_has_superfluously_good_cocktails.html)

Moneybox

Sept. 19 2014 3:33 PM Americans' Inexplicable Aversion to the 1990s
Matthew Yglesias

[Most Recent See All](/full_slate.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/mars_maven_arrival_nasa_mission_will_investigate_mars_climate.html)
Video

Sept. 21 2014 2:25 PM To Mars, Again NASA's MAVEN will investigate the
decline of the red planet’s climate. Dallas Jensen

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/afghanistan_finally_has_a_president_but_vote_totals_kept_secret.html)
The Slatest

Sept. 21 2014 2:21 PM Afghanistan Finally Has a New President but Vote
Totals Kept Secret Daniel Politi

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/colin_farrell_cast_in_true_detective_the_actor_will_star_in_the_show_s_second.html)
Brow Beat

Sept. 21 2014 2:00 PM Colin Farrell Will Star in *True Detective*’s
Second Season Sharan Shetty

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/people_s_climate_march_protesters_sound_alarm_on_climate_change.html)
The Slatest

Sept. 21 2014 1:22 PM Protesters Take to the Streets to Sound Alarm on
Climate Change in New York, Across the World Daniel Politi

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/_rachel_dratch_and_tina_fey_do_second_city_watch_the_grandmas_records_skit.html)
Brow Beat

Sept. 21 2014 12:43 PM Watch Rachel Dratch and Tina Fey Do a Second City
Sketch in 1997 Sharan Shetty

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/omar_gonzalez_white_house_jumper_had_knife_is_iraq_war_veteran.html)
The Slatest

Sept. 21 2014 12:00 PM Knife-Carrying White House Jumper is Vet who
Feared “Atmosphere Was Collapsing” Daniel Politi

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/21/mark_steinmetz_a_look_at_some_of_the_atlanta_based_photographers_quiet_and.html)
Behold

Sept. 21 2014 11:00 AM Sometimes You Just Need to Print Your Photos the
Old-Fashioned Way David Rosenberg

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/21/video_from_space_guided_tour_of_the_earth.html)
Bad Astronomy

Sept. 21 2014 8:00 AM An Astronaut’s Guided Video Tour of Earth Phil
Plait

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/dear_white_people_psas_watch_the_psa_series_that_funnily_condemns_black.html)
Brow Beat

Sept. 20 2014 3:21 PM “The More You Know (About Black People)” Uses Very
Funny PSAs to Condemn Black Stereotypes Sharan Shetty

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/julian_casablancas_and_the_voidz_release_tyranny_stream_the_new_album.html)
Brow Beat

Sept. 20 2014 1:52 PM Julian Casablancas’ New Album Sounds Like the
Furthest Thing From the Strokes Sharan Shetty

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/20/secret_service_under_fire_after_intruder_sprints_inside_white_house.html)
The Slatest

Sept. 20 2014 1:37 PM Secret Service Under Fire After Intruder Jumps
Fence, Makes it Inside White House Daniel Politi

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/20/matthew_todd_miller_north_korea_says_imprisoned_american_wanted_to_become.html)
The Slatest

Sept. 20 2014 12:00 PM North Korea: American Sentenced to Hard Labor
Wanted to Become “Second Snowden” Daniel Politi

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/20/one_in_four_americans_support_idea_of_splitting_from_the_union.html)
The Slatest

Sept. 20 2014 11:51 AM Almost One in Four Americans Support Idea of
Splitting From the Union Daniel Politi

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/20/_30.html) Weigel

Sept. 20 2014 11:13 AM -30- David Weigel

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora/2014/09/20/how_do_plants_grow_aboard_the_international_space_station.html)
Quora

Sept. 20 2014 7:27 AM How Do Plants Grow Aboard the International Space
Station? Quora Contributor

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/slate_money/2014/09/slate_money_on_the_gender_pay_gap_china_japan_and_stock_buybacks.html)
Slate Money

Sept. 20 2014 7:12 AM The Froth Is Nonlinear: The Chinese Economy and
Share Repurchasing Slate Money on the gender pay gap, whether China is
the new Japan, and the reason so many companies are buying back their
own stock. Cardiff Garcia, Cathy O'Neil, and Jordan Weissmann

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/20/sun_astrophoto_by_alan_friedman.html)
Bad Astronomy

Sept. 20 2014 7:00 AM The Shaggy Sun Phil Plait

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics.html) News & Politics

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 20 2014 11:13 AM

[-30-](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/20/_30.html)

David Weigel

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/20/_30.html) Weigel

Sept. 20 2014 11:13 AM -30- David Weigel

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 19 2014 9:15 PM

[Chris Christie, Better Than
Ever](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/chris_christie_better_than_ever.html)

David Weigel

[Chris Christie, Better Than
Ever](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/chris_christie_better_than_ever.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 19 2014 6:22 PM

[Blacks Don’t Have a Corporal Punishment
Problem](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/blacks_and_corporal_punishment_why_we_invent_black_pathologies.html)

Jamelle Bouie

[Blacks Don’t Have a Corporal Punishment
Problem](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/blacks_and_corporal_punishment_why_we_invent_black_pathologies.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 19 2014 5:19 PM

[Washington’s Acting
Roles](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/debo_adegbile_quits_longer_times_to_confirm_presidential_nominees_makes.html)

Boer Deng

[Washington’s Acting
Roles](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/debo_adegbile_quits_longer_times_to_confirm_presidential_nominees_makes.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Foreigners Sept. 19 2014 1:56 PM

[Why Scotland Won’t Be the Last Political Earthquake in
Europe](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2014/09/scotland_votes_to_remain_in_united_kingdom_expect_more_political_earthquakes.html)

Anne Applebaum

[Why Scotland Won’t Be the Last Political Earthquake in
Europe](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2014/09/scotland_votes_to_remain_in_united_kingdom_expect_more_political_earthquakes.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 19 2014 1:51 PM

[How the Republicans Would Run the
Senate](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/how_republicans_would_run_the_senate_their_strategy_for_nominations_obamacare.html)

David Weigel

[How the Republicans Would Run the
Senate](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/how_republicans_would_run_the_senate_their_strategy_for_nominations_obamacare.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 19 2014 1:38 PM

[The Gaffe Police Are Back to Make Politics Glib and
Boring](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/the_gaffe_police_are_back_to_make_politics_glib_and_boring.html)

David Weigel

[The Gaffe Police Are Back to Make Politics Glib and
Boring](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/the_gaffe_police_are_back_to_make_politics_glib_and_boring.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The World Sept. 19 2014 12:33 PM

[How Worried Should Poland, the Baltic States, and Georgia Be About a
Russian
Invasion?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/19/russia_and_eastern_europe_how_worried_should_poland_the_baltic_states_and.html)

Emily Tamkin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The World Sept. 19 2014 11:36 AM

[Scotland Shows That Breaking Up Countries Is Still Hard to
Do](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/19/scottish_independence_referendum_breaking_up_countries_is_still_hard_to.html)

Joshua Keating

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Roads & Kingdoms Sept. 19 2014 11:35 AM

[An Afghan Town Known for Its Blown-Up Buddhas Wants to Be Your Next
Holiday
Destination](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/roads/2014/09/bamiyan_can_a_small_afghan_mountain_town_best_known_for_its_blown_up_buddhas.html)

Sune Engel Rasmussen

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 19 2014 11:15 AM

[Hey, Data Journalists: Lay Off the Scottish Referendum
Pollsters](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/hey_data_journalists_lay_off_the_scottish_referendum_pollsters.html)

David Weigel

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 19 2014 9:34 AM

[The Senate’s Roll Call Vote on Syria,
Explained](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/the_senate_s_roll_call_vote_on_syria_explained.html)

David Weigel

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 18 2014 8:20 PM

[A Clever Attempt at Explaining Away a Vote Against the Farm
Bill](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/18/a_clever_attempt_at_explaining_away_a_vote_against_the_farm_bill.html)

David Weigel

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 18 2014 6:52 PM

[Ground Zero for the Fight Over Female
Voters](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/mark_udall_and_cory_gardner_colorado_senate_race_democrats_and_republicans.html)

John Dickerson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 18 2014 6:20 PM

[An Obvious Way to Help Keep Ex-Cons Out of Prison That Pays for
Itself](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/recidivism_and_mental_illness_iowa_s_central_pharmacy_pilot_project_is_an.html)

Josh Voorhees

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Weigel Sept. 18 2014 3:19 PM

[In Defense of Congress Leaving Town Without a New War
Vote](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/18/in_defense_of_congress_leaving_town_without_a_new_war_vote.html)

David Weigel

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The World Sept. 18 2014 1:34 PM

[Americans Fault Obama for Giving Them Exactly the Anti-ISIS Strategy
They
Want](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/18/obama_isis_strategy_americans_fault_the_president_for_giving_them_exactly.html)

Joshua Keating

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/business.html) Business

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Sept. 20 2014 6:30 AM

[Meet Bill Gates' Investment
Manager](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/20/bill_gates_investment_manager_michael_larson_runs_cascade_investment_llc.html)

Julie Bort

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/20/bill_gates_investment_manager_michael_larson_runs_cascade_investment_llc.html)

Business Insider

Sept. 20 2014 6:30 AM The Man Making Bill Gates Richer Julie Bort

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 19 2014 6:35 PM

[Pabst Blue Ribbon is Being Sold to the Russians, Was So Over
Anyway](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/pbr_sold_to_russians_it_was_so_over_anyway.html)

Jordan Weissmann

[Pabst Blue Ribbon is Being Sold to the Russians, Was So Over
Anyway](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/pbr_sold_to_russians_it_was_so_over_anyway.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 19 2014 3:24 PM

[Why Innovators Hate
MBAs](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/why_peter_thiel_scott_cook_elon_musk_all_hate_mbas.html)

Nathan Furr

[Why Innovators Hate
MBAs](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/why_peter_thiel_scott_cook_elon_musk_all_hate_mbas.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 19 2014 12:09 PM

[How Accelerators Have Changed Startup
Funding](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/accelerators_like_reach_and_second_century_ventures_introduce_new_paradigms.html)

Jeremy Quittner

[How Accelerators Have Changed Startup
Funding](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/accelerators_like_reach_and_second_century_ventures_introduce_new_paradigms.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Sept. 19 2014 11:37 AM

[Why Urban Outfitters and Other Brands Troll Their
Customers](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/19/offensive_kent_state_urban_outfitters_shirt_sparks_controversy_asks_why.html)

Hayley Peterson

[Why Urban Outfitters and Other Brands Troll Their
Customers](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/19/offensive_kent_state_urban_outfitters_shirt_sparks_controversy_asks_why.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 18 2014 6:02 PM

[A Chinese Company Just Announced the Biggest IPO in U.S.
History](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/alibaba_ipo_the_biggest_initial_public_offering_ever_in_the_u_s.html)

Alison Griswold

[A Chinese Company Just Announced the Biggest IPO in U.S.
History](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/alibaba_ipo_the_biggest_initial_public_offering_ever_in_the_u_s.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 18 2014 5:09 PM

[Three CEOs Step Down in 30
Minutes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/larry_ellison_steps_down_as_ceo_of_oracle_clorox_s_don_knauss_and_jetblue.html)

Alison Griswold

[Three CEOs Step Down in 30
Minutes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/larry_ellison_steps_down_as_ceo_of_oracle_clorox_s_don_knauss_and_jetblue.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Sept. 18 2014 3:31 PM

[What Europe Would Look Like If All the Separatist Movements Got Their
Way](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/18/map_what_europe_would_look_like_if_all_the_separatist_movements_got_their.html)

Dina Spector

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 18 2014 2:49 PM

[Amazon Is Testing a New, Dangerously Simple Payment Technology in
Germany](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/amazon_carrier_billing_germans_can_now_pay_for_digital_purchases_in_their.html)

Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 18 2014 2:18 PM

[The NFL Should Lose Its Tax-Exempt Status. Here’s
Why.](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/09/the_nfl_should_lose_its_tax_exempt_status_the_league_is_not_a_nonprofit.html)

Jordan Weissmann

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Sept. 17 2014 1:36 PM

[Nate Silver Versus Princeton Professor: Who Has the Right
Models?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/17/nate_silver_writes_fivethirtyeight_post_criticizing_princeton_professor.html)

Brett LoGiurato

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 17 2014 12:13 PM

[Economist Pays Tribute to Nobel Laureate Robert Shiller With a Poem
About Housing
Bubbles](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/17/karl_case_poem_a_tribute_to_robert_shiller_on_housing_market_bubbles.html)

Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 16 2014 4:16 PM

[So You’re Getting the iPhone 6. Should You Hang Onto Your Unlimited
Data Plan,
Too?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/iphone_6_what_unlimited_data_looks_like_on_verizon_at_t_and_t_mobile_plans.html)

Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 16 2014 2:35 PM

[Germany’s Nationwide Ban on Uber Lasted All of Two
Weeks](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/germany_lifts_ban_on_uber_it_lasted_two_weeks.html)

Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Sept. 16 2014 1:23 PM

[Germany Has Asked Google to Reveal Its Search Algorithm, but That's Not
Going to
Happen](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/16/germany_asks_google_to_reveal_its_search_algorithm_but_that_won_t_happen.html)

James Cook

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 16 2014 12:43 PM

[Middle-Class Incomes: Still Dead in the
Water](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/median_u_s_income_still_stagnating.html)

Jordan Weissmann

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 16 2014 12:22 PM

[Poverty Rate Falls for First Time Since 2006, Remains Way Too
High](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/poverty_rate_2013_it_s_down_for_the_first_time_since_the_recession.html)

Jordan Weissmann

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life.html) Life

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Quora Sept. 20 2014 7:27 AM

[How Do Plants Grow Aboard the International Space
Station?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora/2014/09/20/how_do_plants_grow_aboard_the_international_space_station.html)

Quora Contributor

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora/2014/09/20/how_do_plants_grow_aboard_the_international_space_station.html)
Quora

Sept. 20 2014 7:27 AM How Do Plants Grow Aboard the International Space
Station? Quora Contributor

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Inside Higher Ed Sept. 19 2014 1:34 PM

[College Football Isn’t Attracting the Audience It Used
To](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/inside_higher_ed/2014/09/college_football_isn_t_attracting_the_audience_it_used_to.html)

Jake New

[College Football Isn’t Attracting the Audience It Used
To](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/inside_higher_ed/2014/09/college_football_isn_t_attracting_the_audience_it_used_to.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Atlas Obscura Sept. 19 2014 1:10 PM

[The Island With Lava Fields, a False Forest, and the World's Worst Golf
Course](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/09/19/ascension_island_in_st_helena_lava_fields_false_forest_world_s_worst_golf.html)

Ella Morton

[The Island With Lava Fields, a False Forest, and the World's Worst Golf
Course](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/09/19/ascension_island_in_st_helena_lava_fields_false_forest_world_s_worst_golf.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Eye Sept. 19 2014 12:50 PM

[This Whimsical Driverless Car Imagines Transportation in
2059](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/09/19/dominic_wilcox_designs_driverless_sleeper_car_of_the_future_in_stained_glass.html)

Kristin Hohenadel

[This Whimsical Driverless Car Imagines Transportation in
2059](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/09/19/dominic_wilcox_designs_driverless_sleeper_car_of_the_future_in_stained_glass.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Vault Sept. 19 2014 12:08 PM

[The CIA Used to Have a Commute-by-Canoe Club. One Member’s
Memories.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/09/19/history_of_the_cia_essay_on_the_agency_s_canoe_commute_club.html)

Rebecca Onion

[The CIA Used to Have a Commute-by-Canoe Club. One Member’s
Memories.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/09/19/history_of_the_cia_essay_on_the_agency_s_canoe_commute_club.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Lexicon Valley Sept. 19 2014 11:32 AM

[Why Do Pirates Talk Like
That?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley/2014/09/19/pirate_speech_origins_in_west_country_english_via_robert_newton_aka_long.html)

Gretchen McCulloch

[Why Do Pirates Talk Like
That?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley/2014/09/19/pirate_speech_origins_in_west_country_english_via_robert_newton_aka_long.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Slate Quiz Sept. 18 2014 11:44 PM

[Think You’re Smarter Than ***Slate***’s Future Tense Weather Blogger?
Find Out With This Week’s News
Quiz.](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/the_slate_quiz/2014/09/the_slate_quiz_with_quizmaster_ken_jennings_play_the_news_quiz_for_the_week.html)

Ken Jennings

[Think You’re Smarter Than ***Slate***’s Future Tense Weather Blogger?
Find Out With This Week’s News
Quiz.](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/the_slate_quiz/2014/09/the_slate_quiz_with_quizmaster_ken_jennings_play_the_news_quiz_for_the_week.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Outward Sept. 18 2014 4:15 PM

[Why a Sketch of Chelsea Manning Is Stirring Up
Controversy](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/18/chelsea_manning_s_byline_sketch_criticizing_it_partakes_in_transmisogyny.html)

Tyler Lopez

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Outward Sept. 18 2014 3:24 PM

[Why Are Non-Explicit LGBTQ Sites Still Being Blocked by Filtering
Software?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/18/symantec_removes_sexual_orientation_filter_why_is_lgbtq_content_still_considered.html)

J. Bryan Lowder

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Doonan Sept. 18 2014 2:00 PM

[I Will Miss My Homophobic, Emotionally Withholding
Dog](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/doonan/2014/09/my_homophobic_dog_was_coarse_and_emotionally_withholding_i_miss_him.html)

Simon Doonan

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Eye Sept. 18 2014 12:47 PM

[How One of the Most Prolific Known Forgers in Modern History Faked
Great Works of
Art](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/09/18/mark_landis_documentary_art_and_craft_offers_a_behind_the_scenes_look_at.html)

Kristin Hohenadel

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Education Sept. 18 2014 12:30 PM

[The Revolutionary Notion That Ph.D.s Working Outside Academia Are Not
Miserable
Failures](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/education/2014/09/a_changing_view_of_alt_ac_jobs_in_which_ph_d_s_work_outside_of_academia.html)

Rebecca Schuman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Outward Sept. 18 2014 11:25 AM

[A Look at How Far Queers Have Come on TV
(Video).](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/18/watch_how_much_gay_tv_representation_has_improved_in_just_a_few_years_video.html)

June Thomas and Grace Na

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Vault Sept. 18 2014 9:57 AM

[“The Sun Never Sets Upon the British Empire,” Explained in GIF by an
Old Children’s
Toy](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/09/18/history_of_british_imperialism_child_s_toy_explaining_saying_sun_never_sets.html)

Rebecca Onion

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Food Sept. 18 2014 9:34 AM

[If You Want to Order Good Chinese Food, You Should Stop Thinking of It
as “Chinese
Food”](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/food/2014/09/chinese_restaurant_ordering_tips_geography_etymology_and_adventurousness.html)

Boer Deng

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Dear Prudence Sept. 18 2014 6:00 AM

[Help! My 11-Year-Old Is Exploring Herself With My “Back Massager.”
Should I Stop
Her?](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_is_my_11_year_old_daughter_too_young_to_masturbate_with_a.html)

Emily Yoffe

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Outward Sept. 17 2014 6:53 PM

[Two LGBTQ Trailblazers Win MacArthur “Genius”
Fellowships](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/17/macarthur_genius_fellowships_awarded_to_two_lgbtq_luminaries_alison_bechdel.html)

J. Bryan Lowder

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x.html) Double X

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 19 2014 4:58 PM

[What Happens When Lifetime Makes a Movie Out of the Steubenville Rape
Case](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/the_assault_lifetime_s_steubenville_movie_is_very_dramatic.html)

Amanda Hess

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/the_assault_lifetime_s_steubenville_movie_is_very_dramatic.html)
The XX Factor

Sept. 19 2014 4:58 PM Steubenville Gets the Lifetime Treatment (And a
Cheerleader Erupts Into Flames) Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 19 2014 3:07 PM

[Hillary Clinton's Strategy for Winning in 2016:
Feminism](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/hillary_clinton_and_the_democrats_put_a_feminist_spin_on_traditional_liberal.html)

Amanda Marcotte

[Hillary Clinton's Strategy for Winning in 2016:
Feminism](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/hillary_clinton_and_the_democrats_put_a_feminist_spin_on_traditional_liberal.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 19 2014 1:11 PM

[Why Men Never Remember
Anything](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/why_men_never_remember_anything_the_gender_divide_in_memory_recollection.html)

Melissa Dahl

[Why Men Never Remember
Anything](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/why_men_never_remember_anything_the_gender_divide_in_memory_recollection.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 19 2014 11:33 AM

[Planned Parenthood Is About to Make It a Lot Easier to Get Birth
Control](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/need_birth_control_planned_parenthood_is_developing_an_app_for_that.html)

Amanda Marcotte

[Planned Parenthood Is About to Make It a Lot Easier to Get Birth
Control](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/need_birth_control_planned_parenthood_is_developing_an_app_for_that.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Doublex Sept. 18 2014 8:07 PM

[Yes, Sometimes Women Lie About
Rape](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/false_rape_accusations_why_must_be_pretend_they_never_happen.html)

Cathy Young

[Yes, Sometimes Women Lie About
Rape](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/false_rape_accusations_why_must_be_pretend_they_never_happen.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 18 2014 3:30 PM

[How Crisis Pregnancy Centers Trick
Women](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/vice_news_exposes_how_crisis_pregnancy_centers_lie_to_women_to_stop_abortion.html)

Amanda Marcotte

[How Crisis Pregnancy Centers Trick
Women](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/vice_news_exposes_how_crisis_pregnancy_centers_lie_to_women_to_stop_abortion.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 18 2014 12:03 PM

[The NFL Opines on “the Role of the
Female”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/nfl_on_women_football_marketer_explains_the_role_of_the_female.html)

Amanda Hess

[The NFL Opines on “the Role of the
Female”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/nfl_on_women_football_marketer_explains_the_role_of_the_female.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 18 2014 11:40 AM

[Where Pregnant Women Aren’t Allowed to Work After 36
Weeks](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/child_care_in_the_netherlands_guest_parents_grandparents_and_26_weeks_unpaid.html)

Jessica Grose

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 17 2014 6:14 PM

[There Is a Gender Gap in Bike-Riding. Women, To Your
Bikes!](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/17/gender_gap_alert_men_ride_bikes_way_more_than_women_do.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 17 2014 4:36 PM

[There Is Only One Woman (But Many Colons) on the National Book Award
Nonfiction
Longlist](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/17/national_book_award_nonfiction_longlist_roz_chast_is_the_only_woman_to_make.html)

Katy Waldman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Doublex Sept. 17 2014 4:10 PM

[The Domestic Violence Experts Hired to Fix the NFL Think the NFL Is
Just
Great](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/the_nfl_s_new_domestic_violence_consultants_have_only_nice_things_to_say.html)

Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 17 2014 1:26 PM

[Hey CBS, Rihanna Is Exactly Who I Want to See on My TV Before NFL
Games](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/17/cbs_cuts_rihanna_from_thursday_night_football.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 15 2014 3:31 PM

[My Year As an Abortion
Doula](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/15/abortion_doula_what_it_s_like_volunteering_for_the_doula_project.html)

Alex Ronan

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 15 2014 1:51 PM

[Here's Why Victims of Sexual Assault Don't Go to the
Police](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/15/new_york_times_on_the_laughable_tallahassee_police_response_to_sexual_assault.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 15 2014 12:08 PM

[“Love” Is Not a Defense for Beating Your
Child](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/15/adrian_peterson_child_abuse_minnesota_vikings_star_says_he_beats_his_kid.html)

Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 12 2014 4:05 PM

[Life as an NFL Wife: “He's the Star. Keep Him
Happy.”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/12/nfl_wives_are_expected_to_support_their_husbands_and_be_quiet.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 12 2014 10:29 AM

[The Problem With Talking About Sexual Assault as “Violence Against
Women”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/12/gq_on_male_victims_of_military_sexual_assault.html)

Amanda Marcotte

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts.html) Slate Plus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Tv Club Sept. 21 2014 1:15 PM

[*Doctor Who* Podcast:****Mac Rogers and Phil Sandifer Recap Episode
5](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/tv_club/2014/08/slate_s_doctor_who_podcast_recap_and_spoiler_special.html)

Mac Rogers, Philip Sandifer, Laura Helmuth, June Thomas, and Phil Plait

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/tv_club/2014/08/slate_s_doctor_who_podcast_recap_and_spoiler_special.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)
Tv Club

Sept. 21 2014 1:15 PM The ***Slate*** *Doctor Who* Podcast: Episode 5 A
spoiler-filled discussion of "Time Heist." Mac Rogers, Philip Sandifer,
Laura Helmuth, June Thomas, and Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Picks Sept. 19 2014 12:00 PM

[What Should I Read From ***Slate***This Week? The Slatest Editor Shares
His
Picks.](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_s_weekly_roundup_what_ben_mathis_lilley_read_about_this_week_at_the.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Ben Mathis-Lilley

[What Should I Read From ***Slate***This Week? The Slatest Editor Shares
His
Picks.](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_s_weekly_roundup_what_ben_mathis_lilley_read_about_this_week_at_the.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Sept. 18 2014 1:23 PM

[How Fabiano Caruana Beat the Chess World Champion
(Audio)](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_champion_fabiano_caruana_chats_with_seth_stevenson_about.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Seth Stevenson

[How Fabiano Caruana Beat the Chess World Champion
(Audio)](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_champion_fabiano_caruana_chats_with_seth_stevenson_about.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Fare Sept. 17 2014 9:37 AM

[Is ***Slate*** Too Liberal? Too Predictable? Tell Us What You
Think.](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus/slate_fare/2014/09/is_slate_too_liberal_jessica_winter_hosts_a_members_only_open_thread.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Jessica Winter

[Is ***Slate*** Too Liberal? Too Predictable? Tell Us What You
Think.](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus/slate_fare/2014/09/is_slate_too_liberal_jessica_winter_hosts_a_members_only_open_thread.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Plus Video Sept. 16 2014 2:06 PM

[Emily Bazelon Says Goodbye to ***Slate***
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_plus_video/2014/09/emily_bazelon_leaves_slate_for_new_york_times_magazine_a_final_goodbye.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Emily Bazelon

[Emily Bazelon Says Goodbye to ***Slate***
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_plus_video/2014/09/emily_bazelon_leaves_slate_for_new_york_times_magazine_a_final_goodbye.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Sept. 12 2014 5:55 PM

[What Dahlia Lithwick’s 11-Year-Old Thinks About
Porn](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/porn_for_teens_dahlia_lithwick_chats_with_her_son_about_her_conversation.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Dahlia Lithwick

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Plus Video Sept. 12 2014 5:05 PM

[Mike Pesca Puts the Culture Gabfest in the Hot Seat
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/slate_plus_video/2014/09/culture_gabfest_video_julia_turner_dana_stevens_and_stephen_metcalf_chat.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Stephen Metcalf, Mike Pesca, Dana Stevens, and Julia Turner

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 12 2014 1:32 PM

[The First Time Weigel Read ***Slate***, and What He’ll Miss
Most](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/slate_s_weekly_roundup_david_weigel_pays_tribute_to_the_history_of_slate.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

David Weigel

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Plus Sept. 10 2014 1:26 PM

[Tickets to Boston CultureFest: First Dibs for S+
Members](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/slate_plus/2014/09/boston_culturefest_early_access_tickets_for_slate_plus_members.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Sept. 10 2014 10:39 AM

[What’s It Like to Be a ***Slate*** Satellite? The Pros and Cons of
Working Long
Distance.](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/work_from_home_slate_staffers_chat_about_working_away_from_the_magazine.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Holly Allen, Rachael Larimore, and Josh Voorhees

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Dear Prudence Sept. 9 2014 5:28 PM

[Emily Yoffe’s **Slate Plus** Conversation
Club](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/dear_prudence/2014/09/emily_yoffe_chat_for_slate_plus_members_ask_dear_prudence_anything.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Emily Yoffe

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Picks Sept. 5 2014 8:57 AM

[***Slate***’s Managing Editor on the Best Reads of a Bad
Week](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_s_weekly_roundup_what_rachael_larimore_read_about_isis_exonerations.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Rachael Larimore

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Sept. 4 2014 11:22 AM

[Eleven Questions With ***Slate*** Web Designer Derreck
Johnson](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/derreck_johnson_getting_to_know_slate_s_web_designer_video.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Derreck Johnson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Tv Club Sept. 3 2014 11:00 AM

[*Doctor Who* Podcast:****Phil Plait and Mac Rogers Recap Episode
2](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/tv_club/2014/08/slate_s_doctorwho_podcast_phil_plait_and_june_thomas_recap_episode_1.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Phil Plait, Mac Rogers, and June Thomas

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Picks Sept. 2 2014 10:21 AM

[Listen to August’s Spotify Playlist Exclusively for **Slate Plus**
Members](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_music_august_spotify_playlist_for_slate_plus_members.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Eliza Berman, Dee Lockett, Dan Kois, Katy Waldman, and Forrest Wickman

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts.html) Arts

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 21 2014 2:00 PM

[Colin Farrell Will Star in *True Detective*’s Second
Season](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/colin_farrell_cast_in_true_detective_the_actor_will_star_in_the_show_s_second.html)

Sharan Shetty

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/colin_farrell_cast_in_true_detective_the_actor_will_star_in_the_show_s_second.html)
Brow Beat

Sept. 21 2014 2:00 PM Colin Farrell Will Star in *True Detective*’s
Second Season Sharan Shetty

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 21 2014 12:43 PM

[Watch Rachel Dratch and Tina Fey Do a Second City Sketch in
1997](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/_rachel_dratch_and_tina_fey_do_second_city_watch_the_grandmas_records_skit.html)

Sharan Shetty

[Watch Rachel Dratch and Tina Fey Do a Second City Sketch in
1997](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/_rachel_dratch_and_tina_fey_do_second_city_watch_the_grandmas_records_skit.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behold Sept. 21 2014 11:00 AM

[Sometimes You Just Need to Print Your Photos the Old-Fashioned
Way](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/21/mark_steinmetz_a_look_at_some_of_the_atlanta_based_photographers_quiet_and.html)

David Rosenberg

[Sometimes You Just Need to Print Your Photos the Old-Fashioned
Way](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/21/mark_steinmetz_a_look_at_some_of_the_atlanta_based_photographers_quiet_and.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 20 2014 3:21 PM

[Watch Some Very Funny PSAs Debunking Black
Stereotypes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/dear_white_people_psas_watch_the_psa_series_that_funnily_condemns_black.html)

Sharan Shetty

[Watch Some Very Funny PSAs Debunking Black
Stereotypes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/dear_white_people_psas_watch_the_psa_series_that_funnily_condemns_black.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 20 2014 1:52 PM

[Stream Julian Casablancas’ Wildly Ambitious New Album,
*Tyranny*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/julian_casablancas_and_the_voidz_release_tyranny_stream_the_new_album.html)

Sharan Shetty

[Stream Julian Casablancas’ Wildly Ambitious New Album,
*Tyranny*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/julian_casablancas_and_the_voidz_release_tyranny_stream_the_new_album.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 19 2014 4:48 PM

[You Should Be Listening to
Sbtrkt](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/sbtrkt_a_primer_on_aaron_jerome_the_masked_london_producer_poised_to_break.html)

Dee Lockett

[You Should Be Listening to
Sbtrkt](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/sbtrkt_a_primer_on_aaron_jerome_the_masked_london_producer_poised_to_break.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 19 2014 4:03 PM

[How the Gotham Typeface Came to Define Our
Era](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/gotham_typeface_tobias_frere_jones_font_from_obama_hope_poster_defines_our.html)

Jacob Covey

[How the Gotham Typeface Came to Define Our
Era](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/gotham_typeface_tobias_frere_jones_font_from_obama_hope_poster_defines_our.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 19 2014 3:33 PM

[What It’s Like to Drink Fancy Cocktails at
Denny’s](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/denny_s_drinks_menu_new_york_city_restaurant_has_superfluously_good_cocktails.html)

Troy Patterson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 19 2014 2:44 PM

[These Are the *Mystery Science Theater 3000* Episodes You Should Watch
This
Weekend](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/mystery_science_theater_3000_on_vimeo_10_best_mst3k_episodes_to_watch_of.html)

Courtney Duckworth

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Movies Sept. 19 2014 2:06 PM

[Returning Soldiers as Flawed Heroes and Perfect
Villains](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/movies/2014/09/the_guest_and_fort_bliss_very_different_movies_about_soldiers_returning.html)

Dana Stevens

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 19 2014 1:39 PM

[Shonda Rhimes Is Not an “Angry Black Woman,” *New York Times*. Neither
Are Her
Characters.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/shonda_rhimes_an_angry_black_woman_wrong_new_york_times_she_is_so_much_more.html)

Willa Paskin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 19 2014 12:10 PM

[Tim Burton’s New Movie Hardly Looks Like a Tim Burton
Movie](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/big_eyes_trailer_tim_burton_s_new_movie_with_christoph_waltz_and_amy_adams.html)

Forrest Wickman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behold Sept. 19 2014 11:51 AM

[This Is All That’s Left of New York’s Once-Thriving Borscht
Belt](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/19/marisa_scheinfeld_photographs_old_hotels_in_the_catskill_mountains_in_her.html)

Jordan G. Teicher

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 18 2014 4:33 PM

[The Top 5 Dadsplaining Moments From *The Cosby
Show*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/18/cosby_show_dadsplaining_the_top_5_for_cliff_huxtable_video.html)

Olivia Merrion

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Culturebox Sept. 18 2014 4:00 PM

[Theo’s Joint and Vanessa’s Whiskey: The Very Special Episodes of *The
Cosby
Show*](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/culturebox/2014/09/the_cosby_show_30th_anniversary_a_look_back_at_the_very_special_episodes.html)

Aisha Harris

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 18 2014 3:55 PM

[Why Television Needs a New Cosby Show Right
Now](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/01/22/bill_cosby_returning_to_nbc_for_new_sitcom_his_timing_could_not_be_better.html)

Willa Paskin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 18 2014 3:04 PM

[Pogo Returns With Another Utterly Catchy Disney
Remix](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/18/pogo_remixes_disney_voices_and_songs_on_the_trouble_video.html)

Aisha Harris

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology.html) Technology

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 19 2014 6:31 PM

[I Bought the Huge iPhone. I'm Already Thinking of Returning
It.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html)

Will Oremus

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html)
Future Tense

Sept. 19 2014 6:31 PM The One Big Problem With the Enormous New iPhone
Will Oremus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 19 2014 5:03 PM

[White House Chief Information Officer Will Run U.S. Ebola
Response](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/usaid_s_ebola_response_led_by_steve_vanroekel_former_white_house_chief_information.html)

Lily Hay Newman

[White House Chief Information Officer Will Run U.S. Ebola
Response](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/usaid_s_ebola_response_led_by_steve_vanroekel_former_white_house_chief_information.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 19 2014 12:38 PM

[Nine Leading Climate Scientists Urge You to Attend the People’s Climate
March](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/people_s_climate_march_nine_leading_scientists_on_why_you_should_go.html)

Eric Holthaus

[Nine Leading Climate Scientists Urge You to Attend the People’s Climate
March](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/people_s_climate_march_nine_leading_scientists_on_why_you_should_go.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 19 2014 11:40 AM

[Apple Pants Are the Perfect Accessory for the Giant New
iPhones](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/apple_pants_apparel_for_oversize_iphone_6_and_iphone_6_plus.html)

Chris Wade

[Apple Pants Are the Perfect Accessory for the Giant New
iPhones](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/apple_pants_apparel_for_oversize_iphone_6_and_iphone_6_plus.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 19 2014 11:36 AM

[California’s Green-Vehicle Subsidies Have a Huge, Destructive
Flaw](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/california_s_green_vehicle_subsidies_and_income_inequality.html)

Lisa Margonelli

[California’s Green-Vehicle Subsidies Have a Huge, Destructive
Flaw](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/california_s_green_vehicle_subsidies_and_income_inequality.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 19 2014 11:32 AM

[I Wrote a Novel About the Nigerian Space Program. Then I Met My Main
Character.](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/nigerians_in_space_my_sci_fi_novel_turned_out_to_be_closer_to_the_truth.html)

Deji Bryce Olukotun

[I Wrote a Novel About the Nigerian Space Program. Then I Met My Main
Character.](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/nigerians_in_space_my_sci_fi_novel_turned_out_to_be_closer_to_the_truth.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 6:48 PM

[By 2100 the World's Population Could Be 11
Billion](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/university_of_washington_united_nations_research_world_population_will_be.html)

Lily Hay Newman

[By 2100 the World's Population Could Be 11
Billion](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/university_of_washington_united_nations_research_world_population_will_be.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 5:43 PM

[Oracle’s Larry Ellison Steps Down, Will Be Replaced by
Hurd’n’Catz](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/oracle_ceo_larry_ellison_steps_down_mark_hurd_safra_catz_to_become_ceo.html)

Will Oremus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 5:03 PM

[Bono, Apple Creating "Irresistible" Music Format. Prepare to Buy the
*White Album*
Again.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/bono_apple_creating_irresistible_new_music_format.html)

Dan Gillmor

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 4:26 PM

[Global Oceans Break All-Time Heat Record; World on Pace for Warmest
Year
Ever](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/global_oceans_break_all_time_heat_record_world_on_pace_for_warmest_year.html)

Eric Holthaus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 2:39 PM

[Here's How to Keep Apple From Sharing Your iPhone Data With the
Police](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/if_you_use_a_passcode_in_ios_8_apple_won_t_be_able_to_give_your_personal.html)

Lily Hay Newman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 1:24 PM

[Where’s the (Legal) Harm in Having Nude Photos
Stolen?](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/joy_corrigan_apple_class_action_suit_what_s_the_harm_in_nude_photo_leaks.html)

Josephine Wolff

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 12:46 PM

[The World Is Warming. So Why Is Antarctic Sea Ice Hitting Record
Highs?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/antarctic_sea_ice_is_hitting_record_levels_what_does_that_say_about_global.html)

Eric Holthaus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 18 2014 10:07 AM

[Read a Great Sci-Fi Story About Useless Gadgets—With a
Twist](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/the_day_it_all_ended_by_charlie_jane_anders_from_the_anthology_hieroglyph.html)

Charlie Jane Anders

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 17 2014 9:00 PM

[Amazon Is Officially a Gadget Company. Here Are All 6 of Its New
Devices.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/amazon_kindle_fire_hdx_8_9_kindle_hd_kindle_voyage_it_s_becoming_a_gadget.html)

Will Oremus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 17 2014 7:23 PM

[MIT Researchers Are Using Smartphones to Interact With Other
Screens](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/thaw_from_the_mit_media_lab_lets_smartphones_interact_and_become_a_part.html)

Lily Hay Newman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 17 2014 5:26 PM

[If Fixing Global Warming Is Free, What’s the
Holdup?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/climate_change_economics_new_report_says_nixing_fossil_fuels_won_t_be_expensive.html)

Eric Holthaus

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science.html) Health &
Science

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 21 2014 8:00 AM

[An Astronaut’s Guided Video Tour of
Earth](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/21/video_from_space_guided_tour_of_the_earth.html)

Phil Plait

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/21/video_from_space_guided_tour_of_the_earth.html)
Bad Astronomy

Sept. 21 2014 8:00 AM An Astronaut’s Guided Video Tour of Earth Phil
Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 20 2014 7:00 AM

[The Sun Sports a Limb-to-Limb Shag
Carpet](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/20/sun_astrophoto_by_alan_friedman.html)

Phil Plait

[The Sun Sports a Limb-to-Limb Shag
Carpet](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/20/sun_astrophoto_by_alan_friedman.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Medical Examiner Sept. 19 2014 5:09 PM

[Did America Get Fat by Drinking Diet
Soda?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/artificial_sweeteners_and_obesity_did_america_get_fat_by_drinking_diet_soda.html)

Daniel Engber

[Did America Get Fat by Drinking Diet
Soda?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/artificial_sweeteners_and_obesity_did_america_get_fat_by_drinking_diet_soda.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Medical Examiner Sept. 19 2014 12:13 PM

[The Most Terrifying Thing About
Ebola](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html)

Benjamin Hale

[The Most Terrifying Thing About
Ebola](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 19 2014 11:33 AM

[The Supernova That Didn’t Bark in the
Night](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/19/sn2014j_where_are_the_x_rays.html)

Phil Plait

[The Supernova That Didn’t Bark in the
Night](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/19/sn2014j_where_are_the_x_rays.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Sept. 18 2014 3:35 PM

[A Rabid Bat Attacked an Unlucky Man in Oregon. Do People Still Die of
Rabies?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/rabid_bat_attack_viral_video_do_people_still_die_of_rabies_in_the_united.html)

Rachel Stewart

[A Rabid Bat Attacked an Unlucky Man in Oregon. Do People Still Die of
Rabies?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/rabid_bat_attack_viral_video_do_people_still_die_of_rabies_in_the_united.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 18 2014 7:30 AM

[Red Sprites and Green Glow: Two Rare Phenomena Caught on
Video](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/18/red_sprites_and_green_airglow_randy_halverson_video_of_rare_sights.html)

Phil Plait

[Red Sprites and Green Glow: Two Rare Phenomena Caught on
Video](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/18/red_sprites_and_green_airglow_randy_halverson_video_of_rare_sights.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Medical Examiner Sept. 17 2014 11:48 PM

[Spanking Is a Sex
Act](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/spanking_is_a_sex_act_which_is_why_it_should_not_be_used_for_punishing_children.html)

Jillian Keenan

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Jurisprudence Sept. 17 2014 4:49 PM

[The Supreme Court Gets a Master Class in Rap Music for Aging
Jurists](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/jurisprudence/2014/09/elonis_v_united_states_facebook_free_speech_case_supreme_court_justices.html)

Dahlia Lithwick

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 17 2014 11:18 AM

[The Milky Way, Like a Bridge Across the Sky
(Photo)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/17/astrophoto_the_milky_way_spans_the_sky_by_amirreza_kamkar.html)

Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Do The Math Sept. 17 2014 11:03 AM

[A Huge Discovery About Prime Numbers Just Won This Mathematician a
MacArthur
Fellowship](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/do_the_math/2013/05/yitang_zhang_twin_primes_conjecture_a_huge_discovery_about_prime_numbers.html)

Jordan Ellenberg

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 17 2014 7:30 AM

[Fantastic and Rare Picture of a Circular
Rainbow](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/17/circular_rainbow_rare_optic_effect_seen_from_the_air.html)

Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Medical Examiner Sept. 16 2014 11:46 PM

[Here’s What to Do if You Get a Bug in Your
Ear](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/bug_in_the_ear_how_to_know_if_an_insect_crawled_in_your_ear_and_how_to_get.html)

Annie Stoltie

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Sept. 16 2014 4:09 PM

[Creativity, Conspiracy Theories, and Delusions Have One Thing in
Common:
Apophenia](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/apophenia_makes_unrelated_things_seem_connected_metaphors_paranormal_beliefs.html)

Katy Waldman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Sept. 16 2014 1:39 PM

[A Chinese Woman is Living With No Cerebellum in Her Brain. How Is That
Possible?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/woman_missing_cerebellum_patient_in_china_missing_part_of_her_bran_video.html)

Paca Thomas and Jeffrey Bloomer

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 16 2014 7:30 AM

[A Billion
Tatooines](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/16/exoplanets_half_orbit_stars_in_binary_systems.html)

Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 15 2014 11:00 AM

[The Comet and the Cosmic Beehive
(Photo)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/15/comet_and_globular_marco_lorenzi_photo_of_siding_spring_passing_47_tuc.html)

Phil Plait

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports.html) Sports

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 18 2014 11:42 AM

[One of the Most Amazing Feats in Chess History Just Happened, and No
One
Noticed](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)

Seth Stevenson

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)
Sports Nut

Sept. 18 2014 11:42 AM Grandmaster Clash One of the most amazing feats
in chess history just happened, and no one noticed. Seth Stevenson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 17 2014 3:51 PM

[How Big of a Jerk Is NFL Commissioner Roger
Goodell?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_nfl_jerk_watch_how_much_should_you_loathe_the_pro_football.html)

Jeremy Stahl

[How Big of a Jerk Is NFL Commissioner Roger
Goodell?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_nfl_jerk_watch_how_much_should_you_loathe_the_pro_football.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 15 2014 9:05 PM

[Roger Goodell and the NFL Thought They Had the Press Under Control. Not
Any
More.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_and_the_nfl_thought_they_had_the_press_under_control_not_any.html)

Stefan Fatsis

[Roger Goodell and the NFL Thought They Had the Press Under Control. Not
Any
More.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_and_the_nfl_thought_they_had_the_press_under_control_not_any.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 15 2014 8:41 PM

[Adrian Peterson Doesn’t Even Deserve to Be on Your Fantasy Team. You
Should Release
Him.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/adrian_peterson_child_abuse_allegations_why_fantasy_owners_should_release.html)

A.J. McCarthy

[Adrian Peterson Doesn’t Even Deserve to Be on Your Fantasy Team. You
Should Release
Him.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/adrian_peterson_child_abuse_allegations_why_fantasy_owners_should_release.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 15 2014 5:37 PM

[What Stephen Colbert Is to Dumb Politicians, PFTCommenter Is to the
Dumb
NFL](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pftcommenter_what_stephen_colbert_is_to_dumb_infuriating_politicians_this.html)

Ben Mathis-Lilley

[What Stephen Colbert Is to Dumb Politicians, PFTCommenter Is to the
Dumb
NFL](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pftcommenter_what_stephen_colbert_is_to_dumb_infuriating_politicians_this.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 12 2014 4:36 PM

[Pete Carroll and Jim Harbaugh Exemplify the NFL’s Domestic Violence
Hypocrisy](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pete_carroll_and_jim_harbaugh_on_ray_rice_the_seahawks_and_49ers_coaches.html)

Jeremy Stahl

[Pete Carroll and Jim Harbaugh Exemplify the NFL’s Domestic Violence
Hypocrisy](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pete_carroll_and_jim_harbaugh_on_ray_rice_the_seahawks_and_49ers_coaches.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 11 2014 7:29 PM

[What Happens When an NFL Player Is Accused of Beating Up His Wife and
There’s No
Video](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/terrell_suggs_domestic_violence_like_his_teammate_ray_rice_the_ravens_linebacker.html)

Josh Levin

[What Happens When an NFL Player Is Accused of Beating Up His Wife and
There’s No
Video](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/terrell_suggs_domestic_violence_like_his_teammate_ray_rice_the_ravens_linebacker.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 10 2014 6:36 PM

[An AP Report Is Not Enough—We Need Video Proof That an NFL Executive
Watched the Ray Rice
Video](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/ray_rice_video_an_ap_report_is_not_enough_we_need_video_proof_of_an_nfl.html)

Josh Levin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 9 2014 9:24 PM

[It's Not Just the Hawks. Other Atlanta Sports Teams Seem to Prefer
Their White Fans,
Too.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/hawks_owner_bruce_levenson_s_email_reveals_how_atlanta_s_sports_franchises.html)

Robert Weintraub

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 9 2014 12:15 PM

[Which Professional Athlete Earned the Most Frequent-Flyer Miles in His
Career?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sports_travel_which_team_holds_the_single_season_frequent_flyer_record.html)

Ben Blatt

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 5 2014 3:02 PM

[Teenage Mutant Ninja Bortles, and 2014’s Other Most Popular Fantasy
Football Team
Names](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/fantasy_football_team_names_turn_down_for_watt_stafford_infection_and_2014.html)

Ben Blatt

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 4 2014 2:34 PM

[If Dan Snyder Gets Public Money to Build a New Stadium, It’s Time to
Shut Down Pro
Sports](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/dan_snyder_stadium_deal_if_the_washington_owner_gets_public_money_to_build.html)

Josh Levin and Jeremy Stahl

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 4 2014 12:36 PM

[Science Explains Why Female Tennis Players Can Serve As Fast As
Men](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sabine_lisicki_record_serve_science_explains_why_female_tennis_players_can.html)

Aaron Gordon

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 3 2014 4:37 PM

[How 1994's Pass-Friendly Rule Changes Saved a Moribund League and
Created the Modern
NFL](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/_1994_nfl_rules_how_a_series_of_pass_friendly_changes_saved_a_moribund_league.html)

Kevin Craft

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Aug. 28 2014 4:29 PM

[It’s Time for the NCAA to End Its Pointless Punishment of the Penn
State Football
Program](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/penn_state_ncaa_sanctions_it_s_time_for_the_ncaa_to_end_its_pointless_punishment.html)

Chris Laskowski

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Aug. 28 2014 3:27 PM

[There’s Finally a College Football Playoff This Year. Here’s How It
Will Work.
(Video.)](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/college_football_playoff_the_bcs_is_dead_here_s_how_the_new_playoff_system.html)

Andrew Bouvé and Josh Levin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Aug. 26 2014 11:54 PM

[I Was the Worst High School Quarterback
Ever](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/i_was_the_worst_high_school_quarterback_ever.html)

Josh Keefe

[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html)Medical
Examiner

Sept. 19 2014 12:13 PMThe Most Terrifying Thing About Ebola The disease
threatens humanity by preying on humanity.[Benjamin
Hale](http://www.slate.com/authors.benjamin_hale.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/blacks_and_corporal_punishment_why_we_invent_black_pathologies.html)Politics

Sept. 19 2014 6:22 PMBlacks Don’t Have a Corporal Punishment
ProblemAmericans do. But when blacks exhibit the same behaviors as
others, it becomes part of a greater black pathology. [Jamelle
Bouie](http://www.slate.com/authors.jamelle_bouie.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/inside_higher_ed/2014/09/college_football_isn_t_attracting_the_audience_it_used_to.html)Inside
Higher Ed

Sept. 19 2014 1:34 PMEmpty Seats, Fewer Donors?College football isn’t
attracting the audience it used to.[Jake
New](http://www.slate.com/authors.jake_new.html)

FOLLOW SLATE
[![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/social/yellow-twitterNew.821dc365.png)](https://twitter.com/slate)
[![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/social/yellow-facebookNew.74981e6f.png)](http://www.facebook.com/Slate)

SLATE ON
[IPAD](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/slate-magazine/id384914589?mt=8)
[IPHONE](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/slate-com/id357555242?mt=8)
[ANDROID](https://market.android.com/details?id=com.wapo.slate.android)
[KINDLE](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000IOMTC0?ie=UTF8&tag=slatmaga-20&link_code=as3&camp=211189&creative=373489&creativeASIN=B000IOMTC0/)

[REPRINTS](http://www.slatereprints.com) [ADVERTISE WITH
US](http://innovate.slate.com/)

-   [ABOUT
    US](/articles/news_and_politics/slate_fare/2006/08/about_us.html)
-   [CONTACT
    US](/articles/briefing/contact_us/2006/08/whereto_find_slate_staff.html)
-   [WORK WITH
    US](/articles/news_and_politics/slate_fare/2008/04/a_job_for_you_at_slate.html)

-   [USER
    AGREEMENT](/articles/briefing/slate_user_agreement_and_privacy_policy/2012/12/slate_s_terms_of_service.html)
-   [PRIVACY
    POLICY](/articles/briefing/slate_user_agreement_and_privacy_policy/2012/12/slate_s_privacy_policy.html)
-   [FAQ](/articles/briefing/slate_fare/2011/12/commenting_on_slate_frequently_asked_questions.html)

-   [FEEDBACK](mailto:feedback@slate.com)
-   [CORRECTIONS](/articles/news_and_politics/corrections.html)

-   [![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/the-slate-group-logo.12cbe5ac.png)](http://www.slate.com)
-   [![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/the-root-logo.74009c0a.png)](http://www.theroot.com)
-   Slate is published by The Slate Group, a Graham Holdings Company.
    All contents © 2014 The Slate Group LLC. All rights reserved.

[](#)

[Slate](/)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[SIGN IN](#) [SIGN UP](#)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Future Tense
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone/455720654-customers-look-at-the-new-iphone-6-at-an-apple-store-on.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

I Bought the Huge iPhone. I'm Already Thinking of Returning It.

[Sep 18, 11:42 AM - SETH STEVENSON - Sports Nut One of the Most Amazing
Feats in Chess History Just Happened, and No One
Noticed](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 12:13 PM - BENJAMIN HALE - Medical Examiner The Most Terrifying
Thing About
Ebola](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 8:20 PM - BEN MATHIS-LILLEY - The Slatest ESPN Story Alleges
Ravens, NFL Are Scapegoating Ray Rice in
Cover-Up](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/19/ray_rice_ravens_purposeful_misdirection_new_story_says.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 11:03 AM - JORDAN ELLENBERG - Do The Math A Huge Discovery
About Prime Numbers Just Won This Mathematician a MacArthur
Fellowship](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/do_the_math/2013/05/yitang_zhang_twin_primes_conjecture_a_huge_discovery_about_prime_numbers.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/mars_maven_arrival_nasa_mission_will_investigate_mars_climate.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Video
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/video/2014/TNC14091901-Maven-Still.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

Why Did Mars Go From a Warm, Wet Planet to a Chilly Desert? (Video.)

[Sep 21, 2:21 PM - DANIEL POLITI - The Slatest Afghanistan Finally Has a
New President but Vote Totals Kept
Secret](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/afghanistan_finally_has_a_president_but_vote_totals_kept_secret.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 21, 2:00 PM - SHARAN SHETTY - Brow Beat Colin Farrell Will Star in
*True Detective*’s Second
Season](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/colin_farrell_cast_in_true_detective_the_actor_will_star_in_the_show_s_second.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 21, 1:22 PM - DANIEL POLITI - The Slatest Protesters Take to the
Streets to Sound Alarm on Climate Change Across the
World](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/09/21/people_s_climate_march_protesters_sound_alarm_on_climate_change.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 21, 12:43 PM - SHARAN SHETTY - Brow Beat Watch Rachel Dratch and
Tina Fey Do a Second City Sketch in
1997](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/_rachel_dratch_and_tina_fey_do_second_city_watch_the_grandmas_records_skit.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW ALL](/full_slate.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Atlas Obscura](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura.html) [Bad
Astronomy](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy.html)
[Behold](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold.html) [Brow
Beat](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat.html) [Business
Insider](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider.html) [The
Eye](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye.html) [Future
Tense](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense.html) [Lexicon
Valley](http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley.html)
[Moneybox](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox.html)
[Outward](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward.html)
[Quora](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora.html) [The
Slatest](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest.html) [The
Vault](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault.html) [The
World](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_.html)
[Weigel](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel.html) [Wild
Things](http://www.slate.com/blogs/wild_things.html) [The XX
Factor](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor.html)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/blacks_and_corporal_punishment_why_we_invent_black_pathologies.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Politics
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/140919_POL_BlackPathologyStereotypes.png.CROP.promo-small.png)

Blacks Don’t Have a Corporal Punishment Problem

More News & Politics

-   [Jurisprudence](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Politics](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Foreigners](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The
    Slatest](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Dahlia Lithwick](/authors.dahlia_lithwick.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [David Weigel](/authors.david_weigel.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Emily Bazelon](/authors.emily_bazelon.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Fred Kaplan](/authors.fred_kaplan.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Jamelle Bouie](/authors.jamelle_bouie.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [John Dickerson](/authors.john_dickerson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Josh Voorhees](/authors.josh_voorhees.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Reihan Salam](/authors.reihan_salam.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [William Saletan](/authors.william_saletan.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW
ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 20, 11:13 AM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel
-30-](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/20/_30.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 9:15 PM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel Chris Christie, Better Than
Ever](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/chris_christie_better_than_ever.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 5:19 PM - BOER DENG - Weigel Washington’s Acting
Roles](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/debo_adegbile_quits_longer_times_to_confirm_presidential_nominees_makes.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 1:56 PM - ANNE APPLEBAUM - Foreigners Why Scotland Won’t Be the
Last Political Earthquake in
Europe](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2014/09/scotland_votes_to_remain_in_united_kingdom_expect_more_political_earthquakes.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 1:51 PM - DAVID WEIGEL - Politics How the Republicans Would Run
the
Senate](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/how_republicans_would_run_the_senate_their_strategy_for_nominations_obamacare.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 1:38 PM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel The Gaffe Police Are Back to
Make Politics Glib and
Boring](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/the_gaffe_police_are_back_to_make_politics_glib_and_boring.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 12:33 PM - EMILY TAMKIN - The World How Worried Should Poland,
the Baltic States, and Georgia Be About a Russian
Invasion?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/19/russia_and_eastern_europe_how_worried_should_poland_the_baltic_states_and.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:36 AM - JOSHUA KEATING - The World Scotland Shows That
Breaking Up Countries Is Still Hard to
Do](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/19/scottish_independence_referendum_breaking_up_countries_is_still_hard_to.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:35 AM - SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN - Roads & Kingdoms An Afghan
Town Known for Its Blown-Up Buddhas Wants to Be Your Next Holiday
Destination](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/roads/2014/09/bamiyan_can_a_small_afghan_mountain_town_best_known_for_its_blown_up_buddhas.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:15 AM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel Hey, Data Journalists: Lay Off
the Scottish Referendum
Pollsters](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/hey_data_journalists_lay_off_the_scottish_referendum_pollsters.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 9:34 AM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel The Senate’s Roll Call Vote on
Syria,
Explained](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/19/the_senate_s_roll_call_vote_on_syria_explained.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 8:20 PM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel A Clever Attempt at Explaining
Away a Vote Against the Farm
Bill](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/18/a_clever_attempt_at_explaining_away_a_vote_against_the_farm_bill.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 6:52 PM - JOHN DICKERSON - Politics Ground Zero for the Fight
Over Female
Voters](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/mark_udall_and_cory_gardner_colorado_senate_race_democrats_and_republicans.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 6:20 PM - JOSH VOORHEES - Politics An Obvious Way to Help Keep
Ex-Cons Out of Prison That Pays for
Itself](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/recidivism_and_mental_illness_iowa_s_central_pharmacy_pilot_project_is_an.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 3:19 PM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel In Defense of Congress Leaving
Town Without a New War
Vote](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/18/in_defense_of_congress_leaving_town_without_a_new_war_vote.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 1:34 PM - JOSHUA KEATING - The World Americans Fault Obama for
Giving Them Exactly the Anti-ISIS Strategy They
Want](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/18/obama_isis_strategy_americans_fault_the_president_for_giving_them_exactly.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 1:14 PM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel Ex-Im Bank Creates New Jobs for
Political
Consultants](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/18/ex_im_bank_creates_new_jobs_for_political_consultants.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 10:42 AM - MARK JOSEPH STERN - Jurisprudence Listen to Antonin
Scalia's Most Surprisingly Liberal Moments on the
Bench](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2014/09/justice_antonin_scalia_s_brilliant_liberal_moments_on_the_supreme_court.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 10:23 AM - DAVID WEIGEL - Weigel From Fringe to Mainstream: How
We Learned to Panic About Terrorists Crossing the
Border](http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/09/18/from_fringe_to_mainstream_how_we_learned_to_panic_about_terrorists_crossing.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/05/alice_proujansky_birth_culture_takes_a_look_at_birth_around_the_world_photos.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Behold
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/blogs/behold/2014/09/Birth%20Alice/1.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

What Giving Birth Looks Like Around the World

More Arts

-   [Books](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/books.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Culturebox](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/culturebox.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Movies](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/movies.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Music](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Television](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/television.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Brow
    Beat](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Aisha Harris](/authors.aisha_harris.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Dana Stevens](/authors.dana_stevens.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Forrest Wickman](/authors.forrest_wickman.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Jack Hamilton](/authors.jack_hamilton.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [June Thomas](/authors.june_thomas.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Willa Paskin](/authors.willa_paskin.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 21, 2:00 PM - SHARAN SHETTY - Brow Beat Colin Farrell Will Star in
*True Detective*’s Second
Season](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/colin_farrell_cast_in_true_detective_the_actor_will_star_in_the_show_s_second.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 21, 12:43 PM - SHARAN SHETTY - Brow Beat Watch Rachel Dratch and
Tina Fey Do a Second City Sketch in
1997](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/21/_rachel_dratch_and_tina_fey_do_second_city_watch_the_grandmas_records_skit.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 21, 11:00 AM - DAVID ROSENBERG - Behold Sometimes You Just Need to
Print Your Photos the Old-Fashioned
Way](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/21/mark_steinmetz_a_look_at_some_of_the_atlanta_based_photographers_quiet_and.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 20, 3:21 PM - SHARAN SHETTY - Brow Beat Watch Some Very Funny PSAs
Debunking Black
Stereotypes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/dear_white_people_psas_watch_the_psa_series_that_funnily_condemns_black.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 20, 1:52 PM - SHARAN SHETTY - Brow Beat Stream Julian Casablancas’
Wildly Ambitious New Album,
*Tyranny*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/20/julian_casablancas_and_the_voidz_release_tyranny_stream_the_new_album.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 4:48 PM - DEE LOCKETT - Brow Beat You Should Be Listening to
Sbtrkt](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/sbtrkt_a_primer_on_aaron_jerome_the_masked_london_producer_poised_to_break.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 4:03 PM - JACOB COVEY - Brow Beat How the Gotham Typeface Came
to Define Our
Era](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/gotham_typeface_tobias_frere_jones_font_from_obama_hope_poster_defines_our.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 3:33 PM - TROY PATTERSON - Brow Beat What It’s Like to Drink
Fancy Cocktails at
Denny’s](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/denny_s_drinks_menu_new_york_city_restaurant_has_superfluously_good_cocktails.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 2:44 PM - COURTNEY DUCKWORTH - Brow Beat These Are the *Mystery
Science Theater 3000* Episodes You Should Watch This
Weekend](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/mystery_science_theater_3000_on_vimeo_10_best_mst3k_episodes_to_watch_of.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 2:06 PM - DANA STEVENS - Movies Returning Soldiers as Flawed
Heroes and Perfect
Villains](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/movies/2014/09/the_guest_and_fort_bliss_very_different_movies_about_soldiers_returning.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 1:39 PM - WILLA PASKIN - Brow Beat Shonda Rhimes Is Not an
“Angry Black Woman,” *New York Times*. Neither Are Her
Characters.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/shonda_rhimes_an_angry_black_woman_wrong_new_york_times_she_is_so_much_more.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 12:10 PM - FORREST WICKMAN - Brow Beat Tim Burton’s New Movie
Hardly Looks Like a Tim Burton
Movie](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/big_eyes_trailer_tim_burton_s_new_movie_with_christoph_waltz_and_amy_adams.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:51 AM - JORDAN G. TEICHER - Behold This Is All That’s Left
of New York’s Once-Thriving Borscht
Belt](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/19/marisa_scheinfeld_photographs_old_hotels_in_the_catskill_mountains_in_her.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 4:33 PM - OLIVIA MERRION - Brow Beat The Top 5 Dadsplaining
Moments From *The Cosby
Show*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/18/cosby_show_dadsplaining_the_top_5_for_cliff_huxtable_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 4:00 PM - AISHA HARRIS - Culturebox Theo’s Joint and Vanessa’s
Whiskey: The Very Special Episodes of *The Cosby
Show*](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/culturebox/2014/09/the_cosby_show_30th_anniversary_a_look_back_at_the_very_special_episodes.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 3:55 PM - WILLA PASKIN - Brow Beat Why Television Needs a New
Cosby Show Right
Now](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/01/22/bill_cosby_returning_to_nbc_for_new_sitcom_his_timing_could_not_be_better.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 3:04 PM - AISHA HARRIS - Brow Beat Pogo Returns With Another
Utterly Catchy Disney
Remix](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/18/pogo_remixes_disney_voices_and_songs_on_the_trouble_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 2:32 PM - ALISSA WALKER - Brow Beat How the First Macintosh
Font, Revived for the iPod Classic, Made a Machine Seem
Friendly](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/18/chicago_typeface_apple_computer_font_made_for_macintosh_and_used_on_ipod.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 2:03 PM - DEE LOCKETT - Brow Beat Ryan Adams’ New Song Is a
Reminder That He’s One of His Generation’s Best
Songwriters](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/18/ryan_adams_my_wrecking_ball_video_watch_the_understated_visuals_for_a_beautiful.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 1:47 PM - KRISTY PUCHKO - Brow Beat The Only 15 Netflix Hacks
You’ll Ever
Need](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/18/netflix_hacks_15_tips_for_getting_the_most_out_of_your_netflix_subscription.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Future Tense
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/iphone_6_plus_size_vs_iphone_6_why_i_might_return_apple_s_giant_new_iphone/455720654-customers-look-at-the-new-iphone-6-at-an-apple-store-on.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

I Bought the Huge iPhone. I'm Already Thinking of Returning It.

More Technology

-   [Future
    Tense](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [David Auerbach](/authors.david_auerbach.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Lily Hay Newman](/authors.lily_hay_newman.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Seth Stevenson](/authors.seth_stevenson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Will Oremus](/authors.will_oremus.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW
ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 19, 5:03 PM - LILY HAY NEWMAN - Future Tense White House Chief
Information Officer Will Run U.S. Ebola
Response](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/usaid_s_ebola_response_led_by_steve_vanroekel_former_white_house_chief_information.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 12:38 PM - ERIC HOLTHAUS - Future Tense Nine Leading Climate
Scientists Urge You to Attend the People’s Climate
March](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/people_s_climate_march_nine_leading_scientists_on_why_you_should_go.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:40 AM - CHRIS WADE - Future Tense Apple Pants Are the
Perfect Accessory for the Giant New
iPhones](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/19/apple_pants_apparel_for_oversize_iphone_6_and_iphone_6_plus.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:36 AM - LISA MARGONELLI - Future Tense California’s
Green-Vehicle Subsidies Have a Huge, Destructive
Flaw](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/california_s_green_vehicle_subsidies_and_income_inequality.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:32 AM - DEJI BRYCE OLUKOTUN - Future Tense I Wrote a Novel
About the Nigerian Space Program. Then I Met My Main
Character.](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/nigerians_in_space_my_sci_fi_novel_turned_out_to_be_closer_to_the_truth.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 6:48 PM - LILY HAY NEWMAN - Future Tense By 2100 the World's
Population Could Be 11
Billion](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/university_of_washington_united_nations_research_world_population_will_be.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 5:43 PM - WILL OREMUS - Future Tense Oracle’s Larry Ellison
Steps Down, Will Be Replaced by
Hurd’n’Catz](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/oracle_ceo_larry_ellison_steps_down_mark_hurd_safra_catz_to_become_ceo.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 5:03 PM - DAN GILLMOR - Future Tense Bono, Apple Creating
"Irresistible" Music Format. Prepare to Buy the *White Album*
Again.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/bono_apple_creating_irresistible_new_music_format.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 4:26 PM - ERIC HOLTHAUS - Future Tense Global Oceans Break
All-Time Heat Record; World on Pace for Warmest Year
Ever](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/global_oceans_break_all_time_heat_record_world_on_pace_for_warmest_year.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 2:39 PM - LILY HAY NEWMAN - Future Tense Here's How to Keep
Apple From Sharing Your iPhone Data With the
Police](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/if_you_use_a_passcode_in_ios_8_apple_won_t_be_able_to_give_your_personal.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 1:24 PM - JOSEPHINE WOLFF - Future Tense Where’s the (Legal)
Harm in Having Nude Photos
Stolen?](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/joy_corrigan_apple_class_action_suit_what_s_the_harm_in_nude_photo_leaks.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 12:46 PM - ERIC HOLTHAUS - Future Tense The World Is Warming.
So Why Is Antarctic Sea Ice Hitting Record
Highs?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/18/antarctic_sea_ice_is_hitting_record_levels_what_does_that_say_about_global.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 10:07 AM - CHARLIE JANE ANDERS - Future Tense Read a Great
Sci-Fi Story About Useless Gadgets—With a
Twist](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/the_day_it_all_ended_by_charlie_jane_anders_from_the_anthology_hieroglyph.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 9:00 PM - WILL OREMUS - Future Tense Amazon Is Officially a
Gadget Company. Here Are All 6 of Its New
Devices.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/amazon_kindle_fire_hdx_8_9_kindle_hd_kindle_voyage_it_s_becoming_a_gadget.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 7:23 PM - LILY HAY NEWMAN - Future Tense MIT Researchers Are
Using Smartphones to Interact With Other
Screens](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/thaw_from_the_mit_media_lab_lets_smartphones_interact_and_become_a_part.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 5:26 PM - ERIC HOLTHAUS - Future Tense If Fixing Global Warming
Is Free, What’s the
Holdup?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/climate_change_economics_new_report_says_nixing_fossil_fuels_won_t_be_expensive.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 12:35 PM - LILY HAY NEWMAN - Future Tense IOS 8 Comes Out
Today. Do Not Put It on Your iPhone
4S.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/apple_says_the_iphone_4s_supports_ios_8_but_you_shouldn_t_test_it.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 12:33 PM - Future Tense Netizen Report: Turkey’s Telecom
Authority Acquires Absolute Power Over Internet
Content](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/17/netizen_report_turkey_s_telecom_authority_acquires_absolute_power_over_internet.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 11:14 AM - ANNIE MURPHY PAUL - Future Tense Computer Tutors Can
Read Students’ Emotions. How Does That Make You
Feel?](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/reading_students_emotions_computer_tutors_posture_analysis_seats_pressure.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/19/offensive_kent_state_urban_outfitters_shirt_sparks_controversy_asks_why.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Business Insider
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/19/urbanoutfitter1.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

Why Urban Outfitters and Other Brands Troll Their Customers

More Business

-   [The Dismal
    Science](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/the_dismal_science.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The
    Juice](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/the_juice.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Business
    Insider](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Moneybox](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Alison Griswold](/authors.alison_griswold.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Daniel Gross](/authors.daniel_gross.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Jordan Weissmann](/authors.jordan_weissmann.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW
ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/business.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 20, 6:30 AM - JULIE BORT - Business Insider Meet Bill Gates'
Investment
Manager](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/20/bill_gates_investment_manager_michael_larson_runs_cascade_investment_llc.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 6:35 PM - JORDAN WEISSMANN - Moneybox Pabst Blue Ribbon is
Being Sold to the Russians, Was So Over
Anyway](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/pbr_sold_to_russians_it_was_so_over_anyway.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 3:24 PM - NATHAN FURR - Moneybox Why Innovators Hate
MBAs](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/why_peter_thiel_scott_cook_elon_musk_all_hate_mbas.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 12:09 PM - JEREMY QUITTNER - Moneybox How Accelerators Have
Changed Startup
Funding](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/19/accelerators_like_reach_and_second_century_ventures_introduce_new_paradigms.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 6:02 PM - ALISON GRISWOLD - Moneybox A Chinese Company Just
Announced the Biggest IPO in U.S.
History](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/alibaba_ipo_the_biggest_initial_public_offering_ever_in_the_u_s.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 5:09 PM - ALISON GRISWOLD - Moneybox Three CEOs Step Down in 30
Minutes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/larry_ellison_steps_down_as_ceo_of_oracle_clorox_s_don_knauss_and_jetblue.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 3:31 PM - DINA SPECTOR - Business Insider What Europe Would
Look Like If All the Separatist Movements Got Their
Way](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/18/map_what_europe_would_look_like_if_all_the_separatist_movements_got_their.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 2:49 PM - ALISON GRISWOLD - Moneybox Amazon Is Testing a New,
Dangerously Simple Payment Technology in
Germany](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/18/amazon_carrier_billing_germans_can_now_pay_for_digital_purchases_in_their.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 2:18 PM - JORDAN WEISSMANN - Moneybox The NFL Should Lose Its
Tax-Exempt Status. Here’s
Why.](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/09/the_nfl_should_lose_its_tax_exempt_status_the_league_is_not_a_nonprofit.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 1:36 PM - BRETT LOGIURATO - Business Insider Nate Silver Versus
Princeton Professor: Who Has the Right
Models?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/17/nate_silver_writes_fivethirtyeight_post_criticizing_princeton_professor.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 12:13 PM - ALISON GRISWOLD - Moneybox Economist Pays Tribute to
Nobel Laureate Robert Shiller With a Poem About Housing
Bubbles](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/17/karl_case_poem_a_tribute_to_robert_shiller_on_housing_market_bubbles.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 4:16 PM - ALISON GRISWOLD - Moneybox So You’re Getting the
iPhone 6. Should You Hang Onto Your Unlimited Data Plan,
Too?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/iphone_6_what_unlimited_data_looks_like_on_verizon_at_t_and_t_mobile_plans.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 2:35 PM - ALISON GRISWOLD - Moneybox Germany’s Nationwide Ban
on Uber Lasted All of Two
Weeks](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/germany_lifts_ban_on_uber_it_lasted_two_weeks.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 1:23 PM - JAMES COOK - Business Insider Germany Has Asked
Google to Reveal Its Search Algorithm, but That's Not Going to
Happen](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/16/germany_asks_google_to_reveal_its_search_algorithm_but_that_won_t_happen.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 12:43 PM - JORDAN WEISSMANN - Moneybox Middle-Class Incomes:
Still Dead in the
Water](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/median_u_s_income_still_stagnating.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 12:22 PM - JORDAN WEISSMANN - Moneybox Poverty Rate Falls for
First Time Since 2006, Remains Way Too
High](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/16/poverty_rate_2013_it_s_down_for_the_first_time_since_the_recession.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 10:17 AM - JILLIAN D'ONFRO - Business Insider How Jack Ma
Founded
Alibaba](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/16/how_jack_ma_founded_alibaba.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 7:27 PM - JORDAN WEISSMANN - Moneybox A No-Brainer Approach to
Fighting Poverty: Better Birth
Control](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/15/iud_s_can_be_a_great_poverty_fighting_how_better_birth_control_can.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 4:25 PM - JILLIAN D'ONFRO - Business Insider How Crazy Pants
Landed One CEO a Gig With Google
(Seriously)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/15/clash_san_francisco_scavenger_company_ceo_joe_garvey_wears_crazy_pants_and.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/inside_higher_ed/2014/09/college_football_isn_t_attracting_the_audience_it_used_to.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Inside Higher Ed
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/life/inside_higher_ed/2014/09/140919_HIED_AlohaStadium.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

College Football Isn’t Attracting the Audience It Used To

More Life

-   [Dear
    Prudence](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/dear_prudence.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Education](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/education.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [History](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/history.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Lexicon
    Valley](http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Outward](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Quora](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The
    Vault](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [L.V. Anderson](/authors.lv_anderson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Mark Joseph Stern](/authors.mark_stern.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Rebecca Schuman](/authors.rebecca_schuman.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Simon Doonan](/authors.simon_doonan.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Troy Patterson](/authors.troy_patterson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/life.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 20, 7:27 AM - QUORA CONTRIBUTOR - Quora How Do Plants Grow Aboard
the International Space
Station?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora/2014/09/20/how_do_plants_grow_aboard_the_international_space_station.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 1:10 PM - ELLA MORTON - Atlas Obscura The Island With Lava
Fields, a False Forest, and the World's Worst Golf
Course](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/09/19/ascension_island_in_st_helena_lava_fields_false_forest_world_s_worst_golf.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 12:50 PM - KRISTIN HOHENADEL - The Eye This Whimsical
Driverless Car Imagines Transportation in
2059](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/09/19/dominic_wilcox_designs_driverless_sleeper_car_of_the_future_in_stained_glass.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 12:08 PM - REBECCA ONION - The Vault The CIA Used to Have a
Commute-by-Canoe Club. One Member’s
Memories.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/09/19/history_of_the_cia_essay_on_the_agency_s_canoe_commute_club.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:32 AM - GRETCHEN MCCULLOCH - Lexicon Valley Why Do Pirates
Talk Like
That?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley/2014/09/19/pirate_speech_origins_in_west_country_english_via_robert_newton_aka_long.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 11:44 PM - KEN JENNINGS - The Slate Quiz Think You’re Smarter
Than ***Slate***’s Future Tense Weather Blogger? Find Out With This
Week’s News
Quiz.](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/the_slate_quiz/2014/09/the_slate_quiz_with_quizmaster_ken_jennings_play_the_news_quiz_for_the_week.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 4:15 PM - TYLER LOPEZ - Outward Why a Sketch of Chelsea Manning
Is Stirring Up
Controversy](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/18/chelsea_manning_s_byline_sketch_criticizing_it_partakes_in_transmisogyny.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 3:24 PM - J. BRYAN LOWDER - Outward Why Are Non-Explicit LGBTQ
Sites Still Being Blocked by Filtering
Software?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/18/symantec_removes_sexual_orientation_filter_why_is_lgbtq_content_still_considered.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 2:00 PM - SIMON DOONAN - Doonan I Will Miss My Homophobic,
Emotionally Withholding
Dog](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/doonan/2014/09/my_homophobic_dog_was_coarse_and_emotionally_withholding_i_miss_him.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 12:47 PM - KRISTIN HOHENADEL - The Eye How One of the Most
Prolific Known Forgers in Modern History Faked Great Works of
Art](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/09/18/mark_landis_documentary_art_and_craft_offers_a_behind_the_scenes_look_at.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 12:30 PM - REBECCA SCHUMAN - Education The Revolutionary Notion
That Ph.D.s Working Outside Academia Are Not Miserable
Failures](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/education/2014/09/a_changing_view_of_alt_ac_jobs_in_which_ph_d_s_work_outside_of_academia.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 11:25 AM - J. THOMAS & G. NA - Outward A Look at How Far Queers
Have Come on TV
(Video).](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/18/watch_how_much_gay_tv_representation_has_improved_in_just_a_few_years_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 9:57 AM - REBECCA ONION - The Vault “The Sun Never Sets Upon
the British Empire,” Explained in GIF by an Old Children’s
Toy](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/09/18/history_of_british_imperialism_child_s_toy_explaining_saying_sun_never_sets.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 9:34 AM - BOER DENG - Food If You Want to Order Good Chinese
Food, You Should Stop Thinking of It as “Chinese
Food”](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/food/2014/09/chinese_restaurant_ordering_tips_geography_etymology_and_adventurousness.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 6:00 AM - EMILY YOFFE - Dear Prudence Help! My 11-Year-Old Is
Exploring Herself With My “Back Massager.” Should I Stop
Her?](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_is_my_11_year_old_daughter_too_young_to_masturbate_with_a.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 6:53 PM - J. BRYAN LOWDER - Outward Two LGBTQ Trailblazers Win
MacArthur “Genius”
Fellowships](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/17/macarthur_genius_fellowships_awarded_to_two_lgbtq_luminaries_alison_bechdel.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 5:25 PM - EMILY YOFFE - Dear Prudence Chat With Dear
Prudence](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_live_chat_for_september_22_2014.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 5:10 PM - TROY PATTERSON - Gentleman Scholar Should Men Still
Open Doors for
Women?](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/gentleman_scholar/2014/09/should_gentlemen_still_open_doors_for_women_pragmatism_and_patriarchy_considered.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 1:59 PM - JUNE THOMAS - Outward Should LGBTQ Allies Signal
Their Support to Strangers?
(Video.)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/17/ask_a_homo_should_lgbtq_allies_signal_their_support_to_strangers_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/why_ebola_is_terrifying_and_dangerous_it_preys_on_family_caregiving_and.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Medical Examiner
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/140919_MEDEX_EbolaPatient.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

The Most Terrifying Thing About Ebola

More Health & Science

-   [Medical
    Examiner](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [New
    Scientist](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/new_scientist.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Science](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Bad
    Astronomy](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Wild
    Things](http://www.slate.com/blogs/wild_things.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Daniel Engber](/authors.daniel_engber.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Katy Waldman](/authors.katy_waldman.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW
ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 21, 8:00 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy An Astronaut’s Guided
Video Tour of
Earth](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/21/video_from_space_guided_tour_of_the_earth.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 20, 7:00 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy The Sun Sports a
Limb-to-Limb Shag
Carpet](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/20/sun_astrophoto_by_alan_friedman.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 5:09 PM - DANIEL ENGBER - Medical Examiner Did America Get Fat
by Drinking Diet
Soda?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/artificial_sweeteners_and_obesity_did_america_get_fat_by_drinking_diet_soda.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:33 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy The Supernova That Didn’t
Bark in the
Night](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/19/sn2014j_where_are_the_x_rays.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 3:35 PM - RACHEL STEWART - Science A Rabid Bat Attacked an
Unlucky Man in Oregon. Do People Still Die of
Rabies?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/rabid_bat_attack_viral_video_do_people_still_die_of_rabies_in_the_united.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 7:30 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy Red Sprites and Green
Glow: Two Rare Phenomena Caught on
Video](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/18/red_sprites_and_green_airglow_randy_halverson_video_of_rare_sights.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 11:48 PM - JILLIAN KEENAN - Medical Examiner Spanking Is a Sex
Act](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/spanking_is_a_sex_act_which_is_why_it_should_not_be_used_for_punishing_children.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 4:49 PM - DAHLIA LITHWICK - Jurisprudence The Supreme Court
Gets a Master Class in Rap Music for Aging
Jurists](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/jurisprudence/2014/09/elonis_v_united_states_facebook_free_speech_case_supreme_court_justices.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 11:18 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy The Milky Way, Like a
Bridge Across the Sky
(Photo)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/17/astrophoto_the_milky_way_spans_the_sky_by_amirreza_kamkar.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 11:03 AM - JORDAN ELLENBERG - Do The Math A Huge Discovery
About Prime Numbers Just Won This Mathematician a MacArthur
Fellowship](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/do_the_math/2013/05/yitang_zhang_twin_primes_conjecture_a_huge_discovery_about_prime_numbers.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 7:30 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy Fantastic and Rare Picture
of a Circular
Rainbow](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/17/circular_rainbow_rare_optic_effect_seen_from_the_air.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 11:46 PM - ANNIE STOLTIE - Medical Examiner Here’s What to Do
if You Get a Bug in Your
Ear](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/bug_in_the_ear_how_to_know_if_an_insect_crawled_in_your_ear_and_how_to_get.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 4:09 PM - KATY WALDMAN - Science Creativity, Conspiracy
Theories, and Delusions Have One Thing in Common:
Apophenia](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/apophenia_makes_unrelated_things_seem_connected_metaphors_paranormal_beliefs.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 1:39 PM - P. THOMAS & J. BLOOMER - Science A Chinese Woman is
Living With No Cerebellum in Her Brain. How Is That
Possible?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/woman_missing_cerebellum_patient_in_china_missing_part_of_her_bran_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 7:30 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy A Billion
Tatooines](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/16/exoplanets_half_orbit_stars_in_binary_systems.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 11:00 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy The Comet and the Cosmic
Beehive
(Photo)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/15/comet_and_globular_marco_lorenzi_photo_of_siding_spring_passing_47_tuc.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 7:30 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy Those Frigid Cold Snaps
and Lingering Weather Patterns Have Now Been Linked to Global
Warming](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/15/polar_vortex_deep_meanders_in_vortex_linked_to_global_warming.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 14, 8:38 AM - RACHEL NUWER - New Scientist Scientific Misconduct
Should Be a
Crime](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/new_scientist/2014/09/scientific_misconduct_should_be_a_crime_it_s_like_fraud_or_theft_only_more.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 14, 8:00 AM - PHIL PLAIT - Bad Astronomy Because Why Not: A Volcano
Tornado
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/14/volcano_tornado_video_of_a_vortex_spawned_by_the_iceland_eruption.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/false_rape_accusations_why_must_be_pretend_they_never_happen.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Doublex
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/140918_XX_GuiltyGirl.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

Yes, Sometimes Women Lie About Rape

More Double X

-   [Doublex](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The XX
    Factor](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Amanda Hess](/authors.amanda_hess.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Amanda Marcotte](/authors.amanda_marcotte.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Emily Bazelon](/authors.emily_bazelon.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Jessica Grose](/authors.jessica_grose.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW
ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 19, 4:58 PM - AMANDA HESS - The XX Factor What Happens When
Lifetime Makes a Movie Out of the Steubenville Rape
Case](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/the_assault_lifetime_s_steubenville_movie_is_very_dramatic.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 3:07 PM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor Hillary Clinton's
Strategy for Winning in 2016:
Feminism](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/hillary_clinton_and_the_democrats_put_a_feminist_spin_on_traditional_liberal.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 1:11 PM - MELISSA DAHL - The XX Factor Why Men Never Remember
Anything](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/why_men_never_remember_anything_the_gender_divide_in_memory_recollection.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 11:33 AM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor Planned Parenthood
Is About to Make It a Lot Easier to Get Birth
Control](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/19/need_birth_control_planned_parenthood_is_developing_an_app_for_that.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 3:30 PM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor How Crisis Pregnancy
Centers Trick
Women](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/vice_news_exposes_how_crisis_pregnancy_centers_lie_to_women_to_stop_abortion.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 12:03 PM - AMANDA HESS - The XX Factor The NFL Opines on “the
Role of the
Female”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/nfl_on_women_football_marketer_explains_the_role_of_the_female.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 11:40 AM - JESSICA GROSE - The XX Factor Where Pregnant Women
Aren’t Allowed to Work After 36
Weeks](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/18/child_care_in_the_netherlands_guest_parents_grandparents_and_26_weeks_unpaid.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 6:14 PM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor There Is a Gender Gap
in Bike-Riding. Women, To Your
Bikes!](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/17/gender_gap_alert_men_ride_bikes_way_more_than_women_do.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 4:36 PM - KATY WALDMAN - The XX Factor There Is Only One Woman
(But Many Colons) on the National Book Award Nonfiction
Longlist](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/17/national_book_award_nonfiction_longlist_roz_chast_is_the_only_woman_to_make.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 4:10 PM - AMANDA HESS - Doublex The Domestic Violence Experts
Hired to Fix the NFL Think the NFL Is Just
Great](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/the_nfl_s_new_domestic_violence_consultants_have_only_nice_things_to_say.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 1:26 PM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor Hey CBS, Rihanna Is
Exactly Who I Want to See on My TV Before NFL
Games](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/17/cbs_cuts_rihanna_from_thursday_night_football.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 3:31 PM - ALEX RONAN - The XX Factor My Year As an Abortion
Doula](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/15/abortion_doula_what_it_s_like_volunteering_for_the_doula_project.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 1:51 PM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor Here's Why Victims of
Sexual Assault Don't Go to the
Police](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/15/new_york_times_on_the_laughable_tallahassee_police_response_to_sexual_assault.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 12:08 PM - AMANDA HESS - The XX Factor “Love” Is Not a Defense
for Beating Your
Child](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/15/adrian_peterson_child_abuse_minnesota_vikings_star_says_he_beats_his_kid.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 12, 4:05 PM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor Life as an NFL Wife:
“He's the Star. Keep Him
Happy.”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/12/nfl_wives_are_expected_to_support_their_husbands_and_be_quiet.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 12, 10:29 AM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor The Problem With
Talking About Sexual Assault as “Violence Against
Women”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/12/gq_on_male_victims_of_military_sexual_assault.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 10:28 PM - ALLISON BENEDIKT - The XX Factor Watch CBS
Sportscaster James Brown Deliver a Powerful Speech About Domestic
Violence](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/11/james_brown_on_domestic_violence_the_cbs_sportscaster_delivers_a_powerful.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 4:13 PM - AMANDA MARCOTTE - The XX Factor Ray Rice Defenders
Have Found Their Argument: He’s a Victim
Too](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/11/ray_rice_and_janay_rice_do_not_share_the_blame_at_all.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 2:09 PM - PEGGY ORENSTEIN - The XX Factor Mastectomies Are on
the Rise, Despite the Evidence Against Them.
Why?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/11/mastectomy_to_treat_breast_cancer_is_not_the_most_aggressive_choice_lumpectomy.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Sports Nut
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup/140917_SNUT_CaruanaCarlsen.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

One of the Most Amazing Feats in Chess History Just Happened, and No One
Noticed

More Sports

-   [Sports
    Nut](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Josh Levin](/authors.josh_levin.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 17, 3:51 PM - JEREMY STAHL - Sports Nut How Big of a Jerk Is NFL
Commissioner Roger
Goodell?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_nfl_jerk_watch_how_much_should_you_loathe_the_pro_football.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 9:05 PM - STEFAN FATSIS - Sports Nut Roger Goodell and the NFL
Thought They Had the Press Under Control. Not Any
More.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_and_the_nfl_thought_they_had_the_press_under_control_not_any.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 8:41 PM - A.J. MCCARTHY - Sports Nut Adrian Peterson Doesn’t
Even Deserve to Be on Your Fantasy Team. You Should Release
Him.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/adrian_peterson_child_abuse_allegations_why_fantasy_owners_should_release.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 5:37 PM - BEN MATHIS-LILLEY - Sports Nut What Stephen Colbert
Is to Dumb Politicians, PFTCommenter Is to the Dumb
NFL](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pftcommenter_what_stephen_colbert_is_to_dumb_infuriating_politicians_this.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 12, 4:36 PM - JEREMY STAHL - Sports Nut Pete Carroll and Jim
Harbaugh Exemplify the NFL’s Domestic Violence
Hypocrisy](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pete_carroll_and_jim_harbaugh_on_ray_rice_the_seahawks_and_49ers_coaches.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 7:29 PM - JOSH LEVIN - Sports Nut What Happens When an NFL
Player Is Accused of Beating Up His Wife and There’s No
Video](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/terrell_suggs_domestic_violence_like_his_teammate_ray_rice_the_ravens_linebacker.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 10, 6:36 PM - JOSH LEVIN - Sports Nut An AP Report Is Not Enough—We
Need Video Proof That an NFL Executive Watched the Ray Rice
Video](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/ray_rice_video_an_ap_report_is_not_enough_we_need_video_proof_of_an_nfl.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 9, 9:24 PM - ROBERT WEINTRAUB - Sports Nut It's Not Just the Hawks.
Other Atlanta Sports Teams Seem to Prefer Their White Fans,
Too.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/hawks_owner_bruce_levenson_s_email_reveals_how_atlanta_s_sports_franchises.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 9, 12:15 PM - BEN BLATT - Sports Nut Which Professional Athlete
Earned the Most Frequent-Flyer Miles in His
Career?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sports_travel_which_team_holds_the_single_season_frequent_flyer_record.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 5, 3:02 PM - BEN BLATT - Sports Nut Teenage Mutant Ninja Bortles,
and 2014’s Other Most Popular Fantasy Football Team
Names](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/fantasy_football_team_names_turn_down_for_watt_stafford_infection_and_2014.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 4, 2:34 PM - J. LEVIN & J. STAHL - Sports Nut If Dan Snyder Gets
Public Money to Build a New Stadium, It’s Time to Shut Down Pro
Sports](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/dan_snyder_stadium_deal_if_the_washington_owner_gets_public_money_to_build.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 4, 12:36 PM - AARON GORDON - Sports Nut Science Explains Why Female
Tennis Players Can Serve As Fast As
Men](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sabine_lisicki_record_serve_science_explains_why_female_tennis_players_can.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 3, 4:37 PM - KEVIN CRAFT - Sports Nut How 1994's Pass-Friendly Rule
Changes Saved a Moribund League and Created the Modern
NFL](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/_1994_nfl_rules_how_a_series_of_pass_friendly_changes_saved_a_moribund_league.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Aug 28, 4:29 PM - CHRIS LASKOWSKI - Sports Nut It’s Time for the NCAA
to End Its Pointless Punishment of the Penn State Football
Program](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/penn_state_ncaa_sanctions_it_s_time_for_the_ncaa_to_end_its_pointless_punishment.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Aug 28, 3:27 PM - A. BOUVÉ & J. LEVIN - Sports Nut There’s Finally a
College Football Playoff This Year. Here’s How It Will Work.
(Video.)](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/college_football_playoff_the_bcs_is_dead_here_s_how_the_new_playoff_system.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Aug 26, 11:54 PM - JOSH KEEFE - Sports Nut I Was the Worst High School
Quarterback
Ever](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/i_was_the_worst_high_school_quarterback_ever.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Aug 26, 5:59 PM - BEN MATHIS-LILLEY - Sports Nut Why Did Michigan
Schedule a Rematch of the Most Embarrassing Loss in College Football
History?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/michigan_appalachian_state_2014_why_did_the_wolverines_schedule_a_rematch.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Aug 10, 2:13 PM - JOHN SWANSBURG - Sports Nut Tony Stewart Ran Over and
Killed Kevin Ward Jr. Is He Responsible for Ward's
Death?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/kevin_ward_jr_death_tony_stewart_ran_over_and_killed_a_fellow_driver_is.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Aug 8, 3:17 PM - JOSH LEVIN - Sports Nut Giving More Power to the Five
Richest Conferences Will Be Better for College
Athletes](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/08/ncaa_autonomy_giving_more_power_to_the_five_richest_conferences_will_be.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/mars_maven_arrival_nasa_mission_will_investigate_mars_climate.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Video
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/video/2014/TNC14091901-Maven-Still.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

Why Did Mars Go From a Warm, Wet Planet to a Chilly Desert? (Video.)

More Video

-   [Over
    There](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/over_there.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Screening
    Room](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/film_school.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 18, 5:14 PM - A.J. MCCARTHY - Video Bone Scans Show Richard III
Died a Brutal, Painful, Undignified Battlefield
Death](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/richard_iii_cause_of_death_bone_scans_show_how_the_last_york_king_died_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 1:57 PM - JIM FESTANTE - Video Octopus-Inspired Camouflage
Could Let Soldiers Shift Colors *and* Texture
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/color_changing_camouflage_mit_research_could_let_soldiers_hide_like_an_octopus.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 3:24 PM - EMILY YOFFE - Dear Prudence Help! The Wealthy Local
Moms Are Ostracizing Me—and My
Kids.](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_video_overgrown_mean_girls.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 3:45 PM - JIM FESTANTE - Video What Really Caused the
Mysterious Nicaraguan Crater?
(Video.)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/what_caused_the_nicaraguan_crater_nation_asks_for_u_s_help_after_asteroid.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 3:22 PM - DALLAS JENSEN - Video The Largest Known Predatory
Dinosaur Likely Hunted Underwater
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/spinosaurus_fossil_largest_predatory_dinosaur_known_likely_lived_in_water.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 3:04 PM - JIM FESTANTE - Video The Tallest Tower in South
America Will Be Built Deep in the Amazon
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/amazon_tower_tallest_structure_in_south_america_going_up_in_brazil.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 1:43 PM - ROBERT LIBETTI - Video Breaking Down the Hidden
Messages in Corporate Logos
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/subliminal_messages_in_corporate_logos_fedex_amazon_and_more_cues_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 12, 3:18 PM - DALLAS JENSEN - Video The Most Virus-Packed Location
in Every Office
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/virus_office_spread_coffee_pot_door_knobs_other_workplace_hotspots.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 4:27 PM - DALLAS JENSEN - Video Hundreds of Sunken Ships Now
Protected in Underwater Graveyard
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/thunder_bay_sunken_ships_shipwreck_alley_now_protected_sanctuary_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 3:15 PM - JIM FESTANTE - Video Stonehenge May Cover Vast
Network of Burial Mounds and Ritual Shrines
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/underneath_stonehenge_archaeologists_suggest_site_holds_burial_mounds_ritual.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 10, 2:01 PM - EMILY YOFFE - Dear Prudence Help! My Neighbors Always
Offer to Babysit, but How Do I Know They’re
Serious?](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_video_neighborhood_babysitting_conundrum.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 10, 12:36 PM - SARA SILVERSTEIN - Video The Best—and Worst—Alcohol
Values at a Typical Bar
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/_alcohol_margins_at_bars_what_s_the_best_value_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 8, 4:16 PM - CHRIS WADE - Video Black Adam, Shazam, and the Next
Superhero Franchise Hopeful
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/who_is_black_adam_and_shazam_the_new_rock_dwayne_johnson_superhero_franchise.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 5, 1:26 PM - DALLAS JENSEN - Video NASA’s Futuristic New Rocket
Could Take Us to Mars
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/nasa_biggest_rocket_space_launch_system_set_for_testing_in_2018_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 4, 5:09 PM - DALLAS JENSEN - Video This Mysterious Sea Creature Is
Like No Other Known Animal
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/unexplained_sea_creature_dendrogramma_specimen_is_unclassifiable_in_animal.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 3, 5:23 PM - JIM FESTANTE - Video What Happens When You Demolish a
Giant, 100-Year-Old Dam?
(Video.)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/glines_canyon_dam_explosion_washington_state_dam_demolition_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 3, 1:50 PM - JIM FESTANTE - Video Longtime Stonehenge Mystery
Solved by Unlikely Source
(Video)](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/09/stonehenge_mystery_solved_did_the_monument_used_to_be_a_full_circle_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 3, 1:25 PM - EMILY YOFFE - Dear Prudence Help! My Fiancé Slept With
a Prostitute Before We Met. I Can’t Stop Thinking About
It.](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_video_obsessed_with_my_fiance_s_sexual_past.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 2, 2:54 PM - P. THOMAS & J. BLOOMER - Science An Image So Powerful
NASA Spent 20 Years Debunking
It](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/science/2014/09/mars_face_explained_nasa_missions_debunk_mythical_human_head_formation_video.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent
[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/21/mark_steinmetz_a_look_at_some_of_the_atlanta_based_photographers_quiet_and.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Behold
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/blogs/behold/2014/09/mark%20steinmetz/1.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

Sometimes You Just Need to Print Your Photos the Old-Fashioned Way

[Sep 19, 11:51 AM - JORDAN G. TEICHER - Behold This Is All That’s Left
of New York’s Once-Thriving Borscht
Belt](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/19/marisa_scheinfeld_photographs_old_hotels_in_the_catskill_mountains_in_her.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 1:24 PM - JOSEPHINE WOLFF - Future Tense Where’s the (Legal)
Harm in Having Nude Photos
Stolen?](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/joy_corrigan_apple_class_action_suit_what_s_the_harm_in_nude_photo_leaks.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 12:37 PM - JORDAN G. TEICHER - Behold The Movies May Have
Forgotten About Them, but Black Cowboys Are
Thriving](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/18/forest_mcmullin_photographs_attendees_at_the_bill_pickett_invitational_rodeo.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW ALL](?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Popular
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gabfest/2014/09/the_gabfest_on_the_search_for_progressive_candidates_who_can_win_obama_s.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Political Gabfest
![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/podcasts/gabfest/Podcast_Political_Gabfest_Promo_Large.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

Are Progressives Too Pragmatic to Vote for Progressive Candidates?

More Podcasts

-   [Culture
    Gabfest](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/culturegabfest.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [DoubleX
    Gabfest](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/doublex_gabfest.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Hang Up And
    Listen](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/hang_up_and_listen.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Lexicon
    Valley](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/lexicon_valley.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Live at Politics &
    Prose](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/live_at_politics.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Mom and Dad Are
    Fighting](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/mom_and_dad_are_fighting.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Political
    Gabfest](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gabfest.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Slate
    Money](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/slate_money.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The
    Gist](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW
ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Most Recent

[Sep 20, 7:12 AM - MULTIPLE AUTHORS - Slate Money Slate Money on Whether
China Is the New
Japan](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/slate_money/2014/09/slate_money_on_the_gender_pay_gap_china_japan_and_stock_buybacks.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 6:18 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist Mike Pesca’s Friend Dave Wants
You to Listen to Xavier
Sing](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_speaks_with_bill_mckibben_about_climate_change_and_musician_xavier.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 19, 5:47 PM - MIKE VUOLO - Live at Politics & Prose Sen. Kirsten
Gillibrand Discusses *Off the Sidelines*, Her New
Book](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/live_at_politics/2014/09/sen_kirsten_gillibrand_discusses_her_new_book_off_the_sidelines.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 8:03 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist Police Drummer Stewart Copeland
on His New Silent Film
Score](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_speaks_with_steward_copeland_about_ben_hur_emily_bazelon_about.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 9:11 AM - MULTIPLE AUTHORS - DoubleX Gabfest Is It Ever OK to
Hit Your
Kids?](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/doublex_gabfest/2014/09/adrian_peterson_the_new_republic_on_feminism_s_future_and_the_real_men_meme.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 6:16 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist You Should Definitely Check Out
Comedian Jen Kirkman’s Second Show in
Winnipeg](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_speaks_with_comedian_jen_kirkman_and_vexillologist_ted_kaye.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 8:05 AM - MULTIPLE AUTHORS - Culture Gabfest Are You Looking
Forward to Our Wearable
Future?](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/culturegabfest/2014/09/slate_s_culture_gabfest_on_a_o_scott_s_eulogy_to_adulthood_so_called_fingerprint.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 16, 6:44 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist Ken Follett Explains How to
Write Black Characters as a 65-Year-Old
Brit](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_explores_the_cognitive_science_of_what_gets_attention_with_jim.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 6:52 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist Storm Large Owns Her
Sexuality](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_speaks_with_craig_in_scotland_and_storm_large_on_her_musical_identity.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 5:10 PM - MULTIPLE AUTHORS - Hang Up And Listen Why Do We
Expect the NFL to Do Better Than the Rest of Society on Combating
Domestic
Violence?](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/hang_up_and_listen/2014/09/roger_goodell_s_continued_failure_hang_up_and_listen_on_the_nfl_and_domestic.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 10:09 AM - MULTIPLE AUTHORS - Slate Money Slate Money on
Scotland, Municipal Bonds, and College
Costs](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/slate_money/2014/09/slate_money_on_scotland_municipal_bonds_and_college_costs.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 9:48 AM - MIKE VUOLO - Live at Politics & Prose Maureen
Corrigan Discusses *So We Read On*, Her New
Book](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/live_at_politics/2014/09/maureen_corrigan_discusses_her_new_book_so_we_read_on_about_the_great_gatsby.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 15, 8:08 AM - M. AMMORI & C. ROSEN - Future Tense Are You Ready for
Your Very Own
Drone?](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/future_tense/2014/09/techno_sapiens_nabiha_syed_discusses_private_drones_regulation_and_privacy.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 12, 6:20 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist Why Do I Keep Accidentally
Dating
Swingers?](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_explains_rent_seeking_behavior_with_adam_davidson_and_follow_ups.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 12, 4:03 PM - MULTIPLE AUTHORS - The Audio Book Club The Audio Book
Club Discusses Roxane Gay’s *Bad
Feminist*](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/the_audio_book_club/2014/09/roxane_gay_s_bad_feminist_book_club_discussion_guide_and_podcast.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 12, 10:29 AM - MULTIPLE AUTHORS - Political Gabfest Will Scotland
Leave the United
Kingdom?](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gabfest/2014/09/the_gabfest_on_obama_s_plan_to_defeat_isis_the_war_on_women_s_impact_on.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 6:06 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist Did You See Obama Pull a John
Wayne Last
Night?](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_speaks_with_josh_king_from_polioptics_about_obama_s_isis_address.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 11, 11:26 AM - A. BENEDIKT & D. KOIS - Mom and Dad Are Fighting
Porn for Teens: A Genius
Idea?!](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/mom_and_dad_are_fighting/2014/09/mom_and_dad_are_fighting_porn_and_family_dinner.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 10, 6:14 PM - MIKE PESCA - The Gist Tips for Prosecuting Ray
Rice](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gist/2014/09/the_gist_speaks_with_a_prosecutor_about_the_ray_rice_case_and_john_dickerson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Featured
[](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/tv_club/2014/08/slate_s_doctor_who_podcast_recap_and_spoiler_special.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/Slate%20Plus/articles/2014/09/140919_PLUS_DrWho.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

*Doctor Who* Podcast:****Mac Rogers and Phil Sandifer Recap Episode 5

[](http://www.slate.com/plus/?wpsrc=sp_all_sp_burger_bar_vip)

Most Recent

[Sep 19, 12:00 PM - BEN MATHIS-LILLEY - Slate Picks What Should I Read
From ***Slate***This Week? The Slatest Editor Shares His
Picks.](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_s_weekly_roundup_what_ben_mathis_lilley_read_about_this_week_at_the.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 18, 1:23 PM - SETH STEVENSON - Behind the Scenes How Fabiano
Caruana Beat the Chess World Champion
(Audio)](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_champion_fabiano_caruana_chats_with_seth_stevenson_about.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[Sep 17, 9:37 AM - JESSICA WINTER - Slate Fare Is ***Slate*** Too
Liberal? Too Predictable? Tell Us What You
Think.](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus/slate_fare/2014/09/is_slate_too_liberal_jessica_winter_hosts_a_members_only_open_thread.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[VIEW
ALL](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

-   [POPULAR](#)
-   [RECENT](/full_slate.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [SLATE PLUS](/plus/home?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [NEWS &
    POLITICS](/articles/news_and_politics.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [ARTS](/articles/arts.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [TECHNOLOGY](/articles/technology.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [BUSINESS](/articles/business.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [LIFE](/articles/life.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

-   [HEALTH &
    SCIENCE](/articles/health_and_science.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [DOUBLE X](/articles/double_x.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [SPORTS](/articles/sports.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [VIDEO](/articles/video.html)
-   [PHOTOS](#)
-   [PODCASTS](/articles/podcasts.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [BLOGS](#)

Follow Slate
------------

[](#) [](http://www.facebook.com/Slate) [](https://twitter.com/slate)

Voices
------

-   [Emily Bazelon](/authors.emily_bazelon.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [John Dickerson](/authors.john_dickerson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Simon Doonan](/authors.simon_doonan.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Daniel Engber](/authors.daniel_engber.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Fred Kaplan](/authors.fred_kaplan.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Josh Levin](/authors.josh_levin.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

-   [Dahlia Lithwick](/authors.dahlia_lithwick.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Willa Paskin](/authors.willa_paskin.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Troy Patterson](/authors.troy_patterson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [William Saletan](/authors.william_saletan.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Rebecca Schuman](/authors.rebecca_schuman.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

-   [Dana Stevens](/authors.dana_stevens.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Seth Stevenson](/authors.seth_stevenson.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [David Weigel](/authors.david_weigel.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Jordan Weissmann](/authors.jordan_weissmann.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Emily Yoffe](/authors.emily_yoffe.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

Blogs
-----

-   [Atlas Obscura](/blogs/atlas_obscura.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Bad Astronomy](/blogs/bad_astronomy.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Behold](/blogs/behold.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Brow Beat](/blogs/browbeat.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Business Insider](/blogs/business_insider.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The Eye](/blogs/the_eye.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

-   [Future Tense](/blogs/future_tense.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Lexicon Valley](/blogs/lexicon_valley.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Moneybox](/blogs/moneybox.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Outward](/blogs/outward.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Quora](/blogs/quora.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The Slatest](/blogs/the_slatest.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

-   [The Vault](/blogs/the_vault.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The World](/blogs/the_world_.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Weigel](/blogs/weigel.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [Wild Things](/blogs/wild_things.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)
-   [The XX Factor](/blogs/xx_factor.html?wpisrc=burger_bar)

[](#)

[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[](#) [](#) [](#comments)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.single.html
