-   [Our Program](/our-program.html)
-   [Apply](/apply.html)
-   [Companies](/companies.html)
-   [About](/about.html)
-   [FAQ](/faq.html)
-   [Blog](/blog.html)

[![image](/uploads/3/4/0/9/34091/1366392811.png)](/)

[Silicon Valley and the Edtech Revolution](/blog/silicon-valley-and-the-ed-tech-revolution)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

06/24/2014

[3 Comments](/blog/silicon-valley-and-the-ed-tech-revolution#comments)

*by Geoff Ralston*\
\
Silicon Valley holds a certain mystique among entrepreneurs and
investors. More cool technology was born here, more wealth created, and
more technology revolutions begun, than anywhere else on the planet. The
Valley’s formula for success has been the subject of debate and business
school cases for decades. It certainly helps to have excellent local
universities churning out scores of engineers and entrepreneurs. It also
helps that founding a company, whether it be a success or failure, is
viewed as acceptable and even desirable by the community. When the folks
you bump into at the local watering hole, the supermarket, and cocktail
parties are all starting companies and changing the world, it feels like
anyone can. \
\
But one tech revolution that escaped the influence of Silicon Valley the
first time around was education technology. Although the past is
littered with efforts to make technology matter in K-12 education, few
of those companies came from the Valley, and even fewer were successful.
The Valley’s bold investors have generally stayed far from the space. \
\
In the past several years, however, there has been a major realignment
in the edtech world. Silicon Valley is once again leading the charge in
a technology revolution, and this one might just have the greatest
impact of all. Ironically, the revolution was kicked off by a hedge fund
analyst in Boston, who got funding from Silicon Valley and then Bill
Gates to create--not the next edtech Google--but rather, a non-profit:
the [Khan Academy](http://www.khanacademy.org). Nearly singlehandedly,
Sal Khan made competent teaching available to any child in the world at
any time. He based his new organization in Mountain View, California, in
the heart of Silicon Valley and in the five years since there has been
an explosion of edtech ideas, companies, and investment emanating from
the Valley. \
\
The idea that great education was never for the few and should always be
available to all led to the creation of MOOCs, Massive Open Online
Courses, led by Silicon Valley companies like
[Coursera](http://www.coursera.com) and
[Udacity](http://www.udacity.com). New school models like Rocketship
Education and Summit Public Schools bet on “blended learning” curricula
that merge traditional teaching with individualized, adaptive learning
technologies. More recently a tech founder from Google and Aardvark, Max
Ventilla, founded a new kind of school called
[AltSchool](http://www.altschool.com) to rethink how children are
taught. Companies like[Edmodo](http://www.edmodo.com),
[ClassDojo](http://www.classdojo.com), and
[Remind](http://www.remind.com) (formerly Remind101) are rethinking how
communities of parents, teachers, and students can connect and
collaborate on learning and related skills. And new classes, notably in
programming and computer science, began spreading from Silicon Valley
and out to the world via companies like [CodeHS](http://www.codehs.com).
\
\
In 2011, we founded Imagine K12 because we believed the conditions for
an edtech revolution were in place. The ideas above were beginning to
germinate and we believed then and still believe today that connecting
the people of the world to each other, and to the internet, the
repository of all knowledge and information, would inevitably have as
big an impact on how our children learn as it has had on almost every
other thing we do. So far we have funded over 50 companies (90% of them
remaining in Silicon Valley) who intend to make this happen.\
\
You know a revolution is happening in Silicon Valley when the money
shows up. Venture Capitalists and angel / seed investors have gotten in
on the game. [CB Insights](http://www.cbinsights.com) records a record
$509mm in edtech financing in Q1 of 2014 [1].\
\
In many ways California is the perfect place for the revolution. We have
Silicon Valley and amazing public universities, and yet the California
K-12 school system is in disrepair. We have wealthy schools next to low
income schools. We have an active charter industry. We have big urban
districts as well as rural districts. We have a healthy immigrant
population (ESL). We’re working on solutions to our very own problems
and bringing a wonderful Silicon Valley sense of optimism and
possibility about technology, and the positive role it can have in
making education better for every child in California and elsewhere.\
\
[EdSurge](http://www.edsurge.com), edtech's main information source and
the author of the eponymous, must-read industry newsletter, points out
that 43% of all the edtech jobs being offered are now in the San
Francisco Bay Area. The next highest contender, the Greater New York
Area, has 22% of the total. [2] It is worth pointing out that EdSurge
is, itself, a Silicon Valley startup.\
\
The edtech companies and jobs are here. The preeminent edtech
accelerator is here. The top VC firms in the valley are writing checks.
There is definitely a new game in town. Edtech has officially arrived in
Silicon Valley.\
\
[1]
[http://www.cbinsights.com/blog/ed-tech-venture-capital-record](http://www.cbinsights.com/blog/ed-tech-venture-capital-record)\
[2]
[https://www.edsurge.com/n/2014-06-16-where-are-the-edtech-jobs-a-look-at-openings-in-the-u-s](https://www.edsurge.com/n/2014-06-16-where-are-the-edtech-jobs-a-look-at-openings-in-the-u-s)\
\
\
\

[](http://twitter.com/share?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.imaginek12.com%2F1%2Fpost%2F2014%2F06%2Fsilicon-valley-and-the-ed-tech-revolution.html)

\
\

Comments
--------

Terence

06/24/2014 15:17

Hi Geoff-sometimes i wonder if the
smartphones-computers-ipods-ipads-second and third screens-tv's etc
should all be put away-such that kids might actually have some time to
think -dream-contemplate without the constant distraction and 'need to
know now' information.After all-somehow without it all-you and many
others managed..hope the forehand in good shape!TR

Reply

[Alex](http://skyul.com) [link](http://skyul.com)

06/24/2014 15:59

I still think it's too early to think of the education in a process of
changing into something better. This all new technology is also creating
fewer jobs for the market and further more adding more "distractions".\
 So it's not all that good, only future will tell if it's the right
path.

Reply

[Shawn Drost](http://www.hackreactor.com)
[link](http://www.hackreactor.com)

06/24/2014 21:31

Don't forget bootcamps -- four SF schools started the movement in 2012,
and there are now 114 competitors listed on Course Report:
https://www.coursereport.com/schools\
 \
 I'm a cofounder at Hack Reactor and we're actually approaching the same
model that Udacity, etc are, just from the opposite direction. We've
seen that adult-focused edtech needs to get people jobs, and that
transforming educational access is going to be a major economic force in
the coming years. Compare and contrast the following two programs:\
 \
 https://www.udacity.com/nanodegrees\
 http://www.hackreactor.com/remote-beta

Reply

\
\
\

Leave a Reply
-------------

* * * * *

**Contact**\
 [Email Us](contact.html)\
 [Directions to Office](directions.html)\
 [Jobs Available](jobs.html)

**For Educators**\
 [Join Our Educator Network](teachers.html)\
 [Educator Day](educator-day.html)\
 [Teacher in Residence (TIR)](tir.html)

**For Entrepreneurs**\
 [Apply to IK12 program](apply.html)\
 [Program Details](our-program.html)\
 [IK12 in the Media](press.html)

**For Investors**\
 [List of Companies](companylist.html)\
 [Demo Day](demo-day.html)\

[Follow @imaginek12](https://twitter.com/imaginek12)

  -- --
     
  -- --

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-0dYLvhSGGqUWo.gif)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.imaginek12.com/blog/silicon-valley-and-the-ed-tech-revolution
