[](https://gist.github.com/)

[Sign up for a GitHub account](https://github.com/signup?return_to=gist)
[Sign
in](https://gist.github.com/login?return_to=%2Fkachayev%2F21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878)

-   [All Gists](/discover)

![image](https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/485647?s=140)
[kachayev](/kachayev) /
**[concurrency-in-go.md](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878)**

Last active September 14, 2014

-   [Code
    ![image](https://gist-assets.github.com/assets/spinners/octocat-spinner-32-4ae22f00973f33151cb92eea73616c5c.gif)](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878)
-   [Revisions
    ![image](https://gist-assets.github.com/assets/spinners/octocat-spinner-32-4ae22f00973f33151cb92eea73616c5c.gif)
    67](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878/revisions)
-   [Stars
    ![image](https://gist-assets.github.com/assets/spinners/octocat-spinner-32-4ae22f00973f33151cb92eea73616c5c.gif)
    96](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878/stars)
-   [Forks
    ![image](https://gist-assets.github.com/assets/spinners/octocat-spinner-32-4ae22f00973f33151cb92eea73616c5c.gif)
    3](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878/forks)

### **Embed** URL

### **HTTPS** clone URL

### **SSH** clone URL

You can clone with [HTTPS](#) or [SSH](#).

[Download
Gist](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878/download "Download concurrency-in-go.md as a zip file")

Channels Are Not Enough or Why Pipelining Is Not That Easy

[View **concurrency-in-go.md**](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878)

**** [**concurrency-in-go.md**](#file-concurrency-in-go-md)

[Raw](/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878/raw/d193d0de782a3a9a98df807308aa033f85c34419/concurrency-in-go.md)

File suppressed. Click to show.

[](#channels-are-not-enough)Channels Are Not Enough
===================================================

**... or Why Pipelining Is Not That Easy**

[Golang](https://talks.golang.org/2012/concurrency.slide#1)
[Concurrency](http://blog.golang.org/advanced-go-concurrency-patterns)
[Patterns](http://blog.golang.org/pipelines) for brave and smart.

By [@kachayev](https://twitter.com/kachayev)

[](#intro)Intro
---------------

Go was designed for building concurrency applications easily so it has
goroutines for running independent computations and channels to
communicate with each other. We've all heard this story before. All
examples and tutorials look just fine: we can create a new channel, we
can send to a channel, we can read from a channel, we even have the
nifty, elegant select statement (**btw, why do we still have statements
in 21th century?**), blocking reads and buffers…

[![channels](https://camo.githubusercontent.com/07fd64e7b8339e0e2d1d2d6812b16641afcc8788/68747470733a2f2f7062732e7477696d672e636f6d2f6d656469612f427642534a4a5143414141574838652e6a7067)](https://camo.githubusercontent.com/07fd64e7b8339e0e2d1d2d6812b16641afcc8788/68747470733a2f2f7062732e7477696d672e636f6d2f6d656469612f427642534a4a5143414141574838652e6a7067)

Keynote: **99% of time I don't really care if the response is delivered
with a channel or a magical unicorn brought it on its horn.**

It’s so cool to find yourself writing tutorial for beginners! And it's a
bit painful when you are trying to implement big and sophisticated
system(s). Channels are [primitives](https://golang.org/doc/). They are
low-level building blocks and I highly doubt you want to work with them
on daily basis.

Look at ["advanced
patterns"](http://blog.golang.org/advanced-go-concurrency-patterns) and
["pipeline"](http://blog.golang.org/pipelines). Not that simple right?
Too many things to keep in mind and constantly memorize: when and how to
close channels, how to propagate errors, how to free resources. I'm
complaining about this not because I've tried implementing something and
failed. But because I work with stuff like this every single day.

You can say that it's not necessary for beginner to understand all of
the details of the whole picture. But... are described patterns really
"advanced"? Unfortunately, the answer is *NO*. They're basic and common.

Take a closer look to pipeline problem. Is it really a pipeline? No…
"...for each path from directory calculate `MD5` checksum and collect
result to a single `map[string]string`...". It’s just a `pmap` (parallel
map). Or `pmap` with `pool of executors` in case of bounded parallelism.
And `pmap` should not require that I enter so
[many](http://docs.scala-lang.org/overviews/parallel-collections/overview.html)
[lines](http://clojuredocs.org/clojure_core/clojure.core/pmap) of code.
Wanna look at the real pipelining problem - I will describe one at the
end of the article (see "Building Twitter Analyzer" paragraph).

[](#so-what-about-patterns)So What About Patterns?
--------------------------------------------------

To develop real-world applications fast enough we should be able to
distil higher level abstractions than primitive channels. They are only
a transport layer. We need application level abstractions to write
programs (compare to [OSI](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model)),
otherwise you will find yourself in constantly digging through low-level
details of your channels network trying to find why it doesn’t work.
Only on production machine. From time to time. Without any reasonable
steps to reproduce. Check [Erlang
OTP](http://learnyousomeerlang.com/what-is-otp) that aims to solve the
same problem: to protect you from low-level message passing code.

What is the problem with low-level code? There is a great article
["Edward
C++Hands"](http://bartoszmilewski.com/2013/09/19/edward-chands/):

> Having scissors for hands in not all that bad. Edward has many
> talents: he can, for instance, create stunning dog hairdos. Don’t get
> me wrong — there were many stunning dog hairdos on display (I mean C++
> code that was elegant and simple) but the bulk of the conference was
> about how to avoid mutilation and how to deliver first aid in case of
> accidental amputation.

At [Kyiv Go Meetup](http://www.meetup.com/uagolang/events/188657172/) I
experienced the same situation: 20 lines of clean and readable code on a
single slide. One non-trivial race condition and one possible runtime
panic. Was it obvious for all listeners? No. Not even for half of them.

[](#any-reason-for-panic)Any Reason for Panic?
----------------------------------------------

Ok. Let’s try to collect such patterns. From work experience, from
books, from other languages (yeah, guys, I know that it's hard to
believe but there are several other languages also designed for
concurrency).

Rob Pike [talks](http://talks.golang.org/2012/concurrency.slide#1) about
Fan-in, Fan-out. It’s useful in many ways, but still about the network
of channels. Not about your application. In any case, let's check
(shamelessly stolen from [here](http://blog.golang.org/pipelines)).

    func merge(cs ...<-chan int) <-chan int {
        var wg sync.WaitGroup
        out := make(chan int)

        // Start an output goroutine for each input channel in cs.  output
        // copies values from c to out until c is closed, then calls wg.Done.
        output := func(c <-chan int) {
            for n := range c {
                out <- n
            }
            wg.Done()
        }
        wg.Add(len(cs))
        for _, c := range cs {
            go output(c)
        }

        // Start a goroutine to close out once all the output goroutines are
        // done.  This must start after the wg.Add call.
        go func() {
            wg.Wait()
            close(out)
        }()
        return out
    }

Hm... `<-chan int`. Not that abstract to reuse in my own application
(i.e. move to library)... And not that obvious to reimplement each time
when I need it. How to make it reusable? `<-chan interface{}`? Welcome
to the land of types casting and runtime panics. If you want to
implement high level fan-in (merge) you’re losing type safety. The same
(unfortunately) goes for all other patterns.

What I really want here is:

    func merge[T](cs ...<-chan T) <-chan T

Yeah, I know that Go [doesn't have
generics](http://golang.org/doc/faq#generics) because who ever need
them?

[](#what-is-the-weather-now)What is the Weather Now?
----------------------------------------------------

Return to patterns. Let’s analyse hypothetical project that’s really
close to practical experience in server-side development. We need a
server that accepts request about weather for a given USA state and
respond with info collected from
[OpenWeatherMap](http://openweathermap.org/api). In such a way:

~~~~ {lang="shell"}
$ http localhost:4912/weather?q=CA
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Access-Control-Allow-Credentials: true
Access-Control-Allow-Methods: GET, POST
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
Connection: keep-alive
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
~~~~

    [{
        "clouds": {
            "all": 40
        },
        "id": 5391959,
        "main": {
            "temp": 288.89,
            "temp_max": 291.48,
            "temp_min": 286.15
        },
        "name": "San Francisco",
        "weather": [
            {
                "description": "mist",
                "icon": "50d",
                "id": 701,
                "main": "Mist"
            }
        ]
    }, {
        "clouds": {
            "all": 90
        },
        "id": 5368361,
        "main": {
            "temp": 292.83,
            "temp_max": 296.15,
            "temp_min": 289.15
        },
        "name": "Los Angeles",
        "weather": [
            {
                "description": "mist",
                "icon": "50d",
                "id": 701,
                "main": "Mist"
            }
        ]
    }]

### [](#pmap)Pmap

Let's start from something that we already know. So, we've got the
request `?q=CA`. I don't want to specify where we're going to find list
of relative cities. We can use for this database, in-memory cache or
whatever reasonable. Assume that we have magical `findCities(state)`
function that returns `chan City` (as most universal `go` representation
for lazy sequence). Next? For each city we have to call OpenWeatherMap
API and collect results into single `map[City]Weather`. We've talked
about such pattern already. It's `pmap`. And I want my code to look like

    chanCities := findCities(state)
    resolver := func(name City) Weather { return openWeatherMap.AskFor(name) }
    weather := chanCities.Par.Map(resolver)

or in case of bounded parallelism

    chanCities := findCities(state)
    pool := NewWorkers(20)
    resolver := func(w Worker, name City) Weather { return w.AskFor(name) }
    weather := chanCities.Par.BoundedMap(pool, resolver)

That's it. I want all this `<-done` synchronizations and `select`
sacramentals to be entire hidden.

### [](#futures--promises)Futures & Promises

It can take a long time to get current weather, i.e. when you have long
list of cities for concrete state. Off course you don't want to
duplicate API calls so you should manage simultaneous requests somehow:

    func collect(state string) Weather {
      calc, ok := calculations.get(state) // check if it's in progress
      if !ok {
          calc.calculations.run(state) // run otherwise
      }
      return calc.Wait() // wait until done
    }

This is so called
[future/promise](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futures_and_promises).
From Wiki:

> They describe an object that acts as a proxy for a result that is
> initially unknown, usually because the computation of its value is yet
> incomplete.

I've heard from a number of people that `go` `future` is a simple:

    f := make(chan int, 1)

Which is wrong because all waiters should get result. And this version
is also wrong:

    f := make(chan int, 1)
    v <- f
    f <- v
    // use v here

Because it's impossible to manage resources this way. And I wish you
luck finding a bug if somebody missed the `f <- v` part in his code.

It's not that hard though to implement `promise` directly storing all
waiters (I'm not sure that this code is really bugs free):

    type PromiseDelivery chan interface{}
    type Promise struct {
        sync.RWMutex
        value interface{}
        waiters []PromiseDelivery
    }

    func (p *Promise) Deliver(value interface{}) {
        p.Lock()
        defer p.Unlock()
        p.value = value
        for _, w := range p.waiters {
            locW := w
            go func(){
                locW <- value
            }()
        }
    }

    func (p *Promise) Value() interface{} {
        if p.value != nil {
            return p.value
        }

        delivery := make(PromiseDelivery)
        p.waiters = append(p.waiters, delivery)
        return <-delivery
    }

    func NewPromise() *Promise {
        return &Promise{
            value: nil,
            waiters: []PromiseDelivery{},
        }
    }

How to use it?

    p := NewPromise()
    go func(){
      p.Deliver(42)
    }()
    p.Value().(int) // blocks and returns interface{} when ready

But `interface{}` and type casting are already here. What do I really
want?

    // .. somewhere in well-tested library or even in stdlib
    type PromiseDelivery[T] chan T
    type Promise[T] struct {
        sync.RWMutex
        value T
        waiters []PromiseDelivery[T]
    }
    func (p *Promise[T]) Deliver(value T)
    func (p *Promise[T]) Value() T
    func NewPromise[T]() *Promise[T]

    // in my code:
    v := NewPromise[int]()
    go func(){
      v.Deliver("woooow!") // compilation error
      v.Deliver(42)
    }()
    v.Value() // blocks and returns 42, not interface{}

No, sure, nobody needs generics. What the hell am I talking about?

You can also avoid `p.Lock()` using `select` to listen to `deliver` and
`wait` operations in a single goroutine. You can also introduce special
`.ValueWithTimeout` method which will be really helpful for end users.
And there're lots of other "you can...". Despite the fact that we're
talking about 20 lines of code (that probably will grow each time you
discover more details of futures/promises interactions). Do I really
need to know (or even think) about channels that delivered me the value?
No.

### [](#pubsub)Pub/sub

Assume that we want to build real-time service. So now our client can
open websocket connection with a `q=CA` request and get instant updates
about weather changes in California. It would look something like:

    // deliverer
    calculation.WhenDone(func(state string, w Weather) {
      broker.Publish("CA", w)
    })

    // client
    ch := broker.Subscribe("CA")
    for update := range ch {
      w.Write(update.Serialize())
    }

It's a typical pub/sub. You can learn about it from [Advanced Go
Patterns](http://blog.golang.org/advanced-go-concurrency-patterns) talk
and even find ready-to-use
[implementations](https://github.com/tuxychandru/pubsub). The problems
is that
[they](https://github.com/tuxychandru/pubsub/blob/master/pubsub.go#L34)
[are](https://github.com/tuxychandru/pubsub/blob/master/pubsub.go#L48)
[all](https://github.com/tuxychandru/pubsub/blob/master/pubsub.go#L54)
[about](https://github.com/tuxychandru/pubsub/blob/master/pubsub.go#L58)
interfaces.

Is it possible to implement:

    broker := NewBroker[String, Weather]()
    // so that
    broker.Subs(42) // compilation failure
    // and
    broker.Subs("CA") // returns (chan Weather) not (chan interface{})

Sure! If you're brave enough to copy-paste code from project to project
with small fixes here and there.

### [](#mapfilter)Map/filter

Assume that we want to give our users more flexibility and we're
introducing new query params: `show` which can be equal to
`all|temp|wind|icon`.

Probably you'll start from simples:

    ch := broker.Subscribe("CA")
    for update := range ch {
      temps := []Temp
      for _, t := update.Temp {
        temps = append(temps, t)
      }

      w.Write(temps)
    }

But after 10 such methods you'll realize that it's not composable and
even boring. Maybe you need

    ch := broker.Subscribe("CA").Map(func(w Weather) Temp { return w.Temp })
    for update := range ch {
      w.Write(update)
    }

Wait, did I just say that channel is a
[functor](http://adit.io/posts/2013-04-17-functors,_applicatives,_and_monads_in_pictures.html)?
As well as Future/Promise.

    p := NewPromise().Map(func(w Weather) Temp { return w.Temp })
    go func(){
      p.Deliver(Weather{Temp{42}})
    }()
    p.Value().(Temp) // Temp, not Weather

Which means that I can reuse the same code for channels and futures. You
may also end up with something like
[transducers](http://blog.cognitect.com/blog/2014/8/6/transducers-are-coming).
I frequently use in ClojureScript code tricks like

    (->> (send url) ;; returns chan, put single value to it {:status 200 :result 42} when ready
         (async/filter< #(= 200 (:status %))) ;; check that :status is 200
         (async/map< :result)) ;; expose only 42 to end user
    ;; note, that it will close all channels (including implicit intermediate one) properly

Do I really have to worry if `x` is a channel or a future if I can
simply do `x.Map(transformation)` and get back value of the same type?
Probably not. In this case why am I allowed to do `make(chan int)` and
not `make(Future int)`?

### [](#requestreply)Request/Reply

Assume that our users like our service and use it actively. So we
decided to introduce a simple API limitation: number of requests for
each IP, per day. It's simply to collect the number of calls into single
`map[string]int`. Go docs
[says](http://blog.golang.org/share-memory-by-communicating) "Do not
communicate by sharing memory; instead, share memory by communicating".
Ok, sounds like a nice idea.

So for the first we need the goroutine that will be responsible for
collecting number of requests.

    req := make(chan string)
    go func() { // wow, look here - it's an actor!
      m := map[string]int{}
      for r := range req {
        if v, ok := m[r]; !ok {
          m[r] = 1
        } else {
          m[r] = v + 1
        }
      } 
    }()

    go func() {
      req <- "127.0.0.2"
    }()

    go func() {
      req <- "127.0.0.1"
    }()

It's easy. Now can calculate number of requests for each IP. Not that
much... We also have to be able to ask permission to execute request.

    type Req struct {
      ip string
      resp chan int
    }

    func NewRequest(ip string) *Req {
      return &Req{ip, make(chan int)}
    }

    requests := make(chan *Req)

    go func() {
      m := map[string]int{}
      for r := range requests {
        if v, ok := m[r.ip]; !ok {
          m[r.ip] = 1
        } else {
          m[r.ip] = v + 1
        }
        r.resp <- m[r.ip]
      } 
    }()

    go func() {
      r := NewRequest("127.0.0.2")
      requests <- r
      fmt.Println(<- r.resp)
    }()

    go func() {
      r := NewRequest("127.0.0.1")
      requests <- r
      fmt.Println(<- r.resp)
    }()

I won't even try to ask you about generic solution (without hardcoded
strings and ints). I ask you instead, to check if everything is right
with this code? Is it that simple?

Are you sure, that `r.resp <- m[r.ip]` is a good solution? No.
Definitely not. I don't want anybody to wait for slow clients. Yes? And
what if I have too many slow clients? Maybe I have to handle this
somehow.

Is this part `requests <- r` that simple? What if my actor (server) is
too busy to reply now? Maybe I need to handle timeouts here...

And from time to time I need to specify initialization process.. And
cleanup... Both with timeouts. And the ability to hold requests until
initialization is finished.

What about priority of calls? I.e. when I need to implement `Dump`
procedure for my analytic system but I don't want to pause all users
until analytics data is collected.

And... Looks like `gen_server` in
[Erlang](http://www.erlang.org/doc/man/gen_server.html). For sure I want
it to be implemented once and shipped with well-documented library with
high test coverage rate. 98% of time I don't want to see this
`resp: make(chan int, ?)` and I really don't want to think what should I
put instead of `?`.

**99% of time I don't really care if the response is delivered with a
channel or a magical unicorn brought it on its horn.**

### [](#and-counting)And counting

There are many other common concurrency situations. I think you've
already gotten the idea.

[](#the-pain)The Pain
---------------------

You can tell me, that described patterns are not common. But.. I have to
implement almost all of them in all my projects. Every. Single. Time.
Maybe I’m just out of luck and your projects are as simple as tutorial
for beginners.

I know that most of you will say "world is too hard and programming is
too painful". I continue to upset you: there are at least a few examples
of languages that solved this problem at least partially. Or at least
working on solving it. Haskell and Scala type systems give you ability
to build strong [high-level
abstractions](http://www.amazon.com/Parallel-Concurrent-Programming-Haskell-Multithreaded/dp/1449335942)
or even custom [control
flows](http://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.0.1/scala/dataflow.html) to
[deal](https://github.com/scala/async) with concurrency. An opposite
Clojure is dynamically typed that encourage you to distil and share
[high level](https://github.com/clojure/core.async)
[abstraction](http://blog.cognitect.com/blog/2014/8/6/transducers-are-coming).
Rust has [channels](http://doc.rust-lang.org/std/comm/) and
[generics](http://doc.rust-lang.org/rust.html#generic-functions).

Make it works -\> Make it beautiful -\> Make it reusable.

Now that the first step is done. What's next? Don't get me wrong, `go`
is a perspective language: channels and goroutines are way much better
than i.e. `pthread`, but should we really stop here?

[](#ps-building-twitter-analyzer)P.S. Building Twitter Analyzer
---------------------------------------------------------------

About real-world pipelining.

Probably you've already seen [Twitter
Analytics](https://analytics.twitter.com/) which is really great. Assume
for the time being, that it's not introduced yet and we have to run our
own analysis: for a given username calculate how many unique users saw
(at least theoretically) each of his own tweets. How we can do this? Not
that hard really: read user's timeline, filter away all retweets and
replies, for all other tweets ask for all retweeters, for each retweeter
ask for a list of followers, merge all retweeters' followers together
and add own user's followers. What I want to have as a result of these
steps: `map[TweetId][]Username` (retweeters) and
`map[Username][]Username`. It would be enough to build a fancy table to
show to the requester.

Few technical details that you should be aware of:

-   Twitter API requires OAuth for each call and sets strong limitations
    (450 calls per 15 minutes per each user). To deal with such a
    limitation, we're going to use a predefined list of OAuth tokens
    (i.e. 50) organized into a pool of workers where each worker is able
    to suspend himself before facing problems with limits.

-   Most Twitter API calls use pagination for results with `since_id` or
    `max_id` continuations. So you can't rely on the fact that single
    call to worker will give you full result.

[Example of rough
implementation](https://gist.github.com/kachayev/50d89615101444cd62ad).
Note, that there is no need for you to understand everything in this
file. Just the opposite. If you can't understand it after quick
screening then we're on the right path.

So what do we have here?

1.  Few stages of computations: `TimelineReader` -\> `RetweetersReader`
    -\> `FollowersReader` -\> `FinalReducer`.

2.  Self-stage messaging. All stages are a recursive cause of
    pagination. It means that each stage emits messages both to the next
    stage and to itself. It's much harder to deal with cancellations in
    this case. Or even find out when everything is done on a single
    stage.

3.  Early propagation. There are at least 2 cases here: for the first in
    order to collect mapping from `TweetId` to `[]Username` we need to
    send collected info directly from `RetweetersReader` to
    `FinalReducer`; for the second we know from the very beginning that
    we need to fetch followers for the initial user, so his username
    should be emitted to `RetweetersReader` bypassing `TimelineReader`
    stage.

4.  Middleware reducers. `FollowersReader` is not only a pipe. It's a
    reducer for usernames that we've already seen (cause you don't want
    to duplicate your work).

5.  Long running workers. You can't just wait for workers shutdown in
    many cases, i.e. when you're implementing a server that should
    respond to many clients simultaneously.

[![image](https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/882595?s=140)](/rbucker)

**[rbucker](/rbucker)** commented [September 14, 2014](#comment-1299563)

One thing that rings so true for me ... if you want to adopt a new
technology or framework ... write a tutorial or workshop ... then decide
whether it's the right path. For example docker and CoreOS are great but
when I tried to write a workshop I found enough warts to justify getting
a better handle on the use-cases before just adopting containers on the
word of the brogrammers.

[![image](https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/u/1836202?s=140)](/JKhawaja)

**[JKhawaja](/JKhawaja)** commented [September 14,
2014](#comment-1299584)

Generics allow for code to be written more concisely, but generally
speaking the 'template' method of generics that the author 'examples'
can be dangerous. Most of the time you do not *actually* want a function
to be able to accept a term of *any* type. Being precise about what
exactly a function or method is supposed to accept leads to both safer
code and code that is easier to read.

Go isn't perfect (no language is) but if someone feels very strongly
about certain language features then Go is a great place to test them
out. Just branch the source code for the compiler and implement
something new to your hearts content [0]. Even if they do not add it to
the official language specs, you still might be able to market your
features yourself. Maybe you are looking to be the Bjarne for a Go++?

[0]
[http://golang.org/doc/install/source](http://golang.org/doc/install/source)

[![image](https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/306177?s=140)](/tonyhb)

**[tonyhb](/tonyhb)** commented [September 15, 2014](#comment-1299602)

If you don't want runtime panics when selecting from a channel, use a
typecaster function:

    func typecast(i interface{}) int64 {
      switch i.(type) {
        case int64:
          return i.(int64)
      }
      return nil
    }

Use it like this:

    select {
      case i := <- comms:
        var val int64
        if val = typecast(i); i == nil {
          // whatever
        }
        // carry on safely.
    }

Allows you to create any library which communicates over channels via
interfaces. In your app, just typecast to what you expect. A little bit
more verbose, but no biggie. Especially for something so generic. Solves
a lot of what you're not happy with.

[![image](https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/70804?s=140)](/tylerb)

**[tylerb](/tylerb)** commented [September 15, 2014](#comment-1299625)

Typecast function is nice, though I prefer a direct `if` assert block:

    if val,ok := i.(int64); ok {
      // type assertion succeeded
    }

[![image](https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/306177?s=140)](/tonyhb)

**[tonyhb](/tonyhb)** commented [September 15, 2014](#comment-1299629)

That's awesome! Good little tip. Definitely going to be used going
forward.

[![image](https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/111098?s=140)](/andys)

**[andys](/andys)** commented [September 15, 2014](#comment-1299651)

I not sure that you're comparing "like with like" when you talk about
timeouts and contention for communicating over channels, but not shared
memory.

I understand the point of using channels is it is a more efficient way
to deal with threads executing in parallel, than locks around shared
memory, and the efficiency gain up with the number of cores. This is
even more the case with the example presented - of many writers, one
reader.

(Having said that, today I seriously doubt if the current Go run-time
implementation is actually more efficient in practice.)

[Sign up for free](https://github.com/signup?return_to=gist) **to join
this conversation on GitHub**. Already have an account? [Sign in to
comment](https://gist.github.com/login?return_to=%2Fkachayev%2F21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878)

Something went wrong with that request. Please try again. [](#)

-   [Status](https://status.github.com/)
-   [API](http://developer.github.com)
-   [Blog](https://github.com/blog)
-   [About](https://github.com/about)

[](/)

-   © 2014 GitHub, Inc.
-   [Terms](https://github.com/site/terms)
-   [Privacy](https://github.com/site/privacy)
-   [Security](https://github.com/security)
-   [Contact](https://github.com/contact)

[](#) [](#)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://gist.github.com/kachayev/21e7fe149bc5ae0bd878
