### Navigation

-   [index](../../../../../genindex/ "General Index")
-   [next](../../../../2013/dec/23/read-the-docs-2013-stats/ "Read the Docs 2013 Stats")
    |
-   [previous](../../11/sphinx-isnt-just-for-python/ "Sphinx isn’t just for Python")
    |
-   [Surfing in Kansas](../../../../../) »

How I Judge the Quality of Documentation in 30 Seconds[¶](#how-i-judge-the-quality-of-documentation-in-30-seconds "Permalink to this headline")
===============================================================================================================================================

As a developer, you develop instincts for judging quality of code. One
of my favorite interview questions is:

> When you look at a project’s code for the first time, what are the
> things you look for?

I think this question is telling. Every person has different priorities,
and this is a great way to get at them.

I have developed quick ways to tell the quality of documentation. This
post will be about what they are, and what they mean. Obviously it is
just a heuristic, and having these things doesn’t make good
documentation. However, the absence of them usually indicates a lack of
quality.

A Website[¶](#a-website "Permalink to this headline")
-----------------------------------------------------

**If your documentation is a directory full of files on GitHub, I close
the tab.** With GitHub Pages, Read the Docs, and other places to host
generated documentation for free, not making an effort is unforgivable.

If this is your project, please check out
[Mkdocs](http://www.mkdocs.org/). It is still a new tool, but it will
give your users something much nicer. I also recommend
[Sphinx](http://sphinx-doc.org/) for the most mature approach to
documentation.

Prose[¶](#prose "Permalink to this headline")
---------------------------------------------

If your documentation is generated from source code, I am immediately
skeptical. You should use words to communicate with your users, and
those words shouldn’t live in your source code. **If you included all of
the things needed to document a project in source, your code would be
unreadable.**

So please, use a tool that allows you to write prose documentation
outside of your source code. Your users will thank you.

A great start is to read this series on [Writing Great
Documentation](http://jacobian.org/writing/great-documentation/), and
the resources on the [Write the
Docs](http://docs.writethedocs.org/#contents) docs. [[1]](#id2)

Permalinks[¶](#permalinks "Permalink to this headline")
-------------------------------------------------------

One of the primary uses of documentation is the ability to link
information to other people. **If your documentation doesn’t have an
easy way to link to sections of content on a page, then the value
decreases.** Your users should never have to send someone a link and say
“go here and search for X”. That means your documentation has failed
your users.

You’ll notice even my blog has permalinks. I believe all text content
should, because it greatly increases the utility of the content.

URLs[¶](#urls "Permalink to this headline")
-------------------------------------------

There are two things I always look for in the URL:

> -   Language
> -   Version

Most often, projects don’t have either. Your URL should look something
like: `https://docs.project.com/en/1.0/`{.docutils .literal}

### Versions[¶](#versions "Permalink to this headline")

I see versions in lots of documentation, but not nearly enough. If your
project has versions, your documentation should too. Not everyone can
always upgrade to the latest version. **If someone is using an old
version, they should have access to documentation for that version**.

Along the same lines, you should also have documentation for your
development version. If the docs don’t have a version attached, I have
no idea if they are up to date or not. You should clearly mark your
released versions and development version, otherwise users will get
confused.

### Language[¶](#language "Permalink to this headline")

Language is one I rarely see. The software world has a nasty habit of
forgetting that the whole world doesn’t speak English. If you don’t
provide a language in your URL, you are implicitly sending the message
that the documentation will never be translated.

I believe that translating documentation is a really important step
towards helping people learn to program. **Someone shouldn’t have to
learn Programming and English at the same time.**

Translations are quite a bit of work, so I understand why many projects
don’t have them. But you should at least acknowledge the possibility of
translation by putting the language in the URL.

Conclusion[¶](#conclusion "Permalink to this headline")
-------------------------------------------------------

That is the 30 second way that I determine if a project’s documentation
is worth looking at. These are all hints about if a project actually
cares about its docs. If the project doesn’t care about its
documentation, that is a good sign that you probably shouldn’t use it.

[[1]](#id1)

If this kind of stuff interests you, I help organize a conference about
documentation:
[http://conf.writethedocs.org/](http://conf.writethedocs.org/)

[](../../../../../)

Surfing in

Kansas

### Find me online

-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/ericholscher)
-   [GitHub](https://github.com/ericholscher)
-   [Gittip](https://gittip.com/ericholscher)

### Email me

eric@ericholscher.com

### Subscribe

[RSS](http://feeds.feedburner.com/EricsThoughts)

Conferences
-----------

Write the Docs is happening in Europe and North America this year:

-   [Portland](http://conf.writethedocs.org/na/2014/)
-   [Budapest](http://conf.writethedocs.org/eu/2014/)

### Fund my work

I am currently working to [improve open source
documentation](http://ericholscher.com/blog/2013/sep/25/help-me-improve-documentation/).
If you think this work is important, please [support me on
Gittip](https://www.gittip.com/ericholscher).

### [Table Of Contents](../../../../../)

-   [How I Judge the Quality of Documentation in 30 Seconds](#)
    -   [A Website](#a-website)
    -   [Prose](#prose)
    -   [Permalinks](#permalinks)
    -   [URLs](#urls)
        -   [Versions](#versions)
        -   [Language](#language)

    -   [Conclusion](#conclusion)

© Copyright 2014, Eric Holscher. | [Page
source](../../../../../_sources/blog/2014/feb/27/how-i-judge-documentation-quality.txt)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://ericholscher.com/blog/2014/feb/27/how-i-judge-documentation-quality/
