[Handle's Haus](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/ "Handle's Haus")

Alle meine freunde in meinem haus willkommen

[![image](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/wp-content/themes/pub/twentyten/images/headers/concave.jpg?m=1354156339g)](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/ "Handle's Haus")

[Skip to content](#content "Skip to content")

-   [Home](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/)
-   [About Handle](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/about/)

[← Contracting but Corruscating
Elysia](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/14/contracting-but-corruscating-elysia/)

[Sound and Fury; But No Reaction
→](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/26/sound-and-fury-but-no-reaction/)

[Review of “The Rise of China vs. The Logic of Strategy” by Edward Luttwak](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Posted on [December 17,
2013](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/ "06:40")
by
[Handle](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/author/handleshaus/ "View all posts by Handle")

[Edward Luttwak](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Luttwak) is an
extremely impressive individual who has led a profoundly interesting
life. I won’t bore you here with his extensive biography except to say
briefly that he’s a geopolitical and military strategist, analyst, and
adviser by trade (well, mostly), and an enjoyably clear and entertaining
writer. Since my ‘Review’ of TROCVTLOS would be, ‘Seems mostly right to
me’ it would be better for me to summarize the book’s thesis instead.

(UPDATE: Thanks to a commenter, [here’s an hour long
interview](http://youtu.be/WejSKbicS00) with Luttwak on his book.
UPDATE2: Welcome YCombinator / Hacker News)

I was first introduced to Luttwak’s writings through reading his very
influential [article in
Harpers’](http://harpers.org/archive/2007/02/dead-end/) “[Dead End:
Counterinsurgency warfare as military
malpractice](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/soc.culture.iranian/mr1QS9YqUv8)”
([pdf here](www.ifri.org/files/politique_etrangere/luttwak.pdf%20)) and
has been reading everything he writes ever since. I thoroughly enjoyed
and highly recommend his “[Coup d’Etat: A Practical
Handbook](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coup_d%27%C3%89tat:_A_Practical_Handbook)”
which, while dated (1968), is both a great scholarly work on a rarely
assessed topic, and a terrific piece of witty satire. His “Grand
Strategies” of the Roman and Byzantine empires are phenomenal
multidisciplinary works of historical analysis. When he delves into
Economic affairs he does seem a little out of his element, such as with
his book “[Turbo
Capitalism](http://www.amazon.com/Turbo-Capitalism-Winners-Losers-Global-Economy/dp/006093137X)“.
But his forward to Ian Fletcher’s ‘[Free Trade Doesn’t
Work](http://www.amazon.com/Free-Trade-Doesnt-Work-Replace/dp/0578082667/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1387157496&sr=8-8&keywords=luttwak)‘
was sensible enough, where he continued his theme that modern free
market ideology is a religion that is leading certain developed
countries unnecessarily to their decline.

Here’s [a Sailer
post](http://isteve.blogspot.com/2011/10/edward-luttwak.html) on his
[interview with Tablet
magazine](http://www.tabletmag.com/jewish-news-and-politics/76739/qa-edward-luttwak?all=1).
The interview helps to illustrate that Luttwak presents himself as a
kind of the anti-Kissinger. He’s worked extensively for the U.S. Army
and DoD (and is now a senior associate at
[CSIS](http://csis.org/expert/edward-n-luttwak)), and his style and
reputation are almost the polar opposites of Kissinger’s.

Luttwak is considered to be brutally honest, whereas Kissinger is
recognized as a successful and charming but mendacious manipulator. Both
are brilliant, and both are flawed in their own ways, but, in my view,
Luttwak’s writing is more often reliable as giving you *actually
correct* information (though selectively, with a slant towards his
broader agenda of policy influence), whereas Kissinger is better at
obtaining access and favor. They are kind of a real life Jewish
immigrants versions of the ‘[Once an
Eagle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Once_An_Eagle)‘ duo where Kissinger
is Massengale and Luttwak is Damon. Naturally, it is Kissinger who has
had more [positions of
influence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_National_Security_Advisor)
and [makes a lot more
money](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kissinger_Associates) in his 90th
year with a wife who is much taller and leaner than he is. Kissinger
advocates [Realpolitik](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Realpolitik),
whereas Luttwak emphasizes the paradoxes of this ‘interests-maximizing
rational actors’ approach in his version of the ‘[Grand Strategy’
concept](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_strategy).

To put it very simply, rational decision making, especially in
competitive scenarios, is divided into different disciplines which
concentrate on different scales of time, space, and complexity. In the
immediate time frame – with only a few moving parts and only several
feasible courses of action which will play themselves out in a short
period of time – we have ‘tactics’.

Tactics don’t require much fluid intelligence or *ad hoc* improvisation,
and instead are ‘in the can’ techniques and procedures that are
repeatedly practiced and drilled, so that subordinates can deliver high
quality performance on demand, and [the cognitive burden of assessing
situations is lowered so that recognizing which tactics are the most
appropraite to employ becomes crystallized in the minds of junior
leadership](http://isteve.blogspot.com/2013/12/mit-even-when-test-scores-go-up-some.html).

Above tactics is the Operational level which requires more planning and
wargaming, and involves more complexity and less certainty. While the
lexicon is hardly uniform, we can generally call the next subsequent
stages Campaign Plans (for phases of a particular conflict), Strategies,
Theater Strategies, and finally, at the longest time horizon for all the
global interests of the nation at large, we have ‘Grand Strategy’.

Extremely long-term strategizing involves so much complexity and
uncertainty that one cannot conceive of goals in anything but large
generalities. Luttwak is, very reasonably, highly materialistic on this
score, and says that Grand Strategy is largely about trying to maximize
the resources and various forms of capital under the sure command of
future decision makers, but even more importantly the *relative*
advantage one has over one’s potential rivals. It’s worth it to take
oneself down a notch if it takes your adversary down two. But the
positive side of the coin of Grand Strategy involves economic growth, a
large and high quality population, the accumulation of lots of
cutting-edge military hardware and advanced intelligence capabilities,
and the right set of international alliances.

AMENDATION: A great historical example of the predominance of material
factors with regards to achieving victory in any conflict is the
American Civil War. By most accounts I’ve read of the era, the
Confederacy had better soldiers and superior generals. Yes, they were
outnumbered from the beginning, but they punched far above their weight
and the numerical disparity on its own was insufficient to account for
the Union victory. But the Union’s vast material and economic
superiority, and it’s ability to industrially produce far more
military-related output, probably meant that Southern defeat was
inevitable.

As an illustration of this, I hold in my mind the image of the last year
of the war, during the [siege of
Petersburg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siege_of_Petersburg), when the
Union was simultaneously cutting off all the confederate railroads while
building a new one straight from the captured harbor to the very edge of
its own front lines. The ships from the North came in at hundreds a day,
and the Union supply situation continuously improved while the
Confederates starved. By the end of winter, Lee was on the run, and he
couldn’t run for long.

So, you might simplify greatly and say that Grand Strategy is, “Make
Decisions So As To Be As Much Stronger Than Your Competitors As Possible
In The Future”. Doing that, and assuming everyone else is also trying to
do that, is very Realpolitick.

But there’s a catch that is similar to what [Heartiste says about
super-alpha Paul
Walker](http://heartiste.wordpress.com/2013/12/02/how-super-alpha-males-are-similar-to-hot-babes/),
“Rules governing human interaction break down and recombine into strange
new polarities, nearly the inverse of the laws that regulate most
biocommerce between the sexes.”

Likewise, Luttwak contends that at the higher levels of Grand Strategy
the logic of ‘[get big or get
stomped](http://isteve.blogspot.com/2013/09/peter-turchin-explains-war-what-is-it.html)‘
reverses paradoxically. If you pursue military aggrandizement so
monomaniacally and consistently with realpolitick that you start to
seriously threaten your neighbors and competitors then, if they are
smart enough and act in time, you will provoke them into forming an
alliance of resistance dedicated to doing whatever is necessary short of
nuclear war, but including crushing your economy, to prevent you from
getting big enough to dominate. Luttwak says that the ‘*realists’* are
in fact fooling themselves with a delusion in regards to imagining
themselves as actors with ‘*free will*‘ and that the sequence of
international power politics is much more deterministic as all the
actors are in fact, “… trapped by the paradoxes of the logic of
strategy, which imposes its own imperatives …”

In other words, pursuing the action of rapid and massive growth in your
military capabilities ends up being counterproductive in that it
stimulates reactions by your counterparties which will *lower* your
overall competitiveness. Trying to get ahead one notch encourages your
competitors to get ahead two notches. Of course, if you able to get so
big, so fast, while those counterparties fail to summon their will and
organize, then you pass a tipping point and really do get to dominate
and stomp. The resistance-of-rivals-to-your-expected-future-power graph
is a bell curve, running from indifference to near-conflict but then
back to resignation and acquiescence or even effective subservience.

> What characterizes the realm of strategy is the impossibility of
> achieving straightforward results by straightforward action, because
> others exist and others react in between the two.

But short of that, the ideal thing to do for an emerging great power
(China, in this case) would be to artificially *suppress* your military
aggrandizement and try to influence perceptions about your country in
the direction of ‘friendly’, ‘trustworthy’, ‘peaceful’,
‘non-confrontational’, ‘cooperative’ and especially ‘non-threatening’
growing out of ‘objectively not interested in domination because not
interested in military power’.

Then the people that could stop you will be lulled into just ignoring
you as you are able to devote all your resources grow your economy to
colossal proportions. All butter, no guns. And then, after you’ve built
your Mt. Everest of butter, you can use it later to buy yourself a
world-class regionally-dominating military in short order, too quickly
to be stopped. And then you can stomp and dominate with it. Suckers!

That’s what you *could* do, but the bottom line of Luttwak’s book is
that China is making a huge unforced error in this regard by *not* doing
this, and in fact, doing the opposite. China is pursuing a Realpolitick
National Strategy of ‘get stronger fast’ (it’s no coincidence that
Kissinger’s latest book, ‘[On
China](http://www.amazon.com/On-China-Henry-Kissinger/dp/0143121316)‘,
is a collection of flattery over growth which encourages them to do
this) at the expense of more subtle Grand Strategy considerations, ‘but
be careful not to provoke your counterparties into reaction’.

China is doing it wrong in two ways, especially since a well recognized
‘behavioral shift’ in 2008 coinciding with the Global Financial Crisis.
First, it is growing its Armed Forces rapidly, with impressive annual
military budget increases that sometimes even exceed their stellar pace
of economic growth. Second, in what Luttwak calls its ‘Premature
Assertiveness’, China has pursued very obnoxious, aggressive, and
confrontational policies with regard to territorial, maritime, and
airspace disputes with other nations in the region. It constantly makes
stubborn and uncompromising maximal claims over everything ,and it has
taken risky and threatening actions over every [trivial pile of
rocks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Senkaku_Islands_dispute) in the
ocean that ever had a Chinese subject sing a poem in which he dreamed
about stepping foot there or maybe just fishing in the general vicinity.

Contradicting the conventional wisdom as to its ‘purely commercial’
rationale, it does this whether or not there is actually any indicated
of hydrocarbon reserves nearby, which emphasizes the military and
regionally hegemonic motives of behavior. Lastly, not only does the
Chinese government seem both utterly tone-deaf and indifferent to the
effect these acts have on the attitudes of other nations, but it
imagines this type of behavior to be a clever and successful negotiating
technique. The
[ADIZ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_Defense_Identification_Zone)
[stunt](http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/chinas-selective-access-denial-strategy-9482)
is just the latest in a string of recent unilateral provocations of this
type.

It probably works wonders getting the local boys all riled up. But,
Luttwak claims, strategically it’s a huge mistake.

**I. Premature Assertiveness**

Luttwak mentions several non-exclusive theories as to origin of China’s
premature assertiveness.

1.  China’s rulers have been made unhinged by their sudden rise of
    fortune
2.  China’s multitude of uncoordinated and effectively independent
    governmental institutions, ‘go rogue’ and pursue their own agendas
    at the expense of the national interest.
3.  As above, since 2008, China’s leaders believe that threats and
    provocations aren’t as offensive as they really are, and are instead
    beneficial in that they induce others to negotiate over long
    festering and unresolved disputes in a conciliatory manner.

The third explanation is most accurate and contradicts in practice the
officially promulgated Chinese policy of ‘Peaceful Development’
(Zhongguo heping fazhan) or ‘Peaceful Rise’ (Zhongguo heping jueqi). But
the second explanation has some truth to it as well, and it in a
desperate and simultaneously untrusted attempt to get the thousand, Dr.
Strangelove-esque minds-of-their-own-tentacles of the Chinese government
apparatus on board, senior officials have occasionally had to issue
memoranda reminding people that they are supposed to be committed to an
accomodative and unaggressive policy.

**II. Great State Autism**

Luttwak says that the largest and most powerful nations (especially if
they have a long history of power and independence of cultural identity)
tend to have leaderships that are ‘Autistic’ with regards to
international affairs. What he means by ‘Autism’ I think is a kind of
ideologically delusional, and intellectually lazy, ignorance with
regards to the nature of other states and their peoples. Clearly, that
causes a lot of deleterious miscalculation and surprise.

There are several reasons for this:

1.  The Inability to Scale The Management of Domestic Events:
    1.  Almost inevitably, whether by conscious design or shaped by
        impersonal market forces, nations tend to have a single,
        coordinated ‘dominant national news story du jour’ in their most
        prominent media outlet, or, the equivalent, a repetitive
        echoing-complex, seemingly constituted of of many independent
        content creators, but which actually feeds off a few principal
        sources.
    2.  And there are certain categories of rare, shocking, scandalous,
        or tragic activity that will cause a mass reaction because the
        human mind will always place them in the ‘nationally newsworthy’
        category. And ‘nationally newsworthy’ events tend to create a
        perception of a need for a response by the top national
        leadership.
    3.  And, given the statistically stochastic nature of human events,
        having a large population necessarily means that more of these
        national events will occur. So leaders of large, advanced
        countries find themselves constantly dealing with these ‘urgent’
        domestic occurrences which leaves them unable to focus seriously
        on studying foreign affairs. They, “.. cannot adsorb in-depth
        information with all its complexities and subtleties, even if it
        is offered to them…” This over-attention can also be caused by
        1.  A political system [cough, Democracy, cough] that
            overemphasizes focus on domestic issues and punishes anyone
            who takes their finger off the domestic pulse for even a
            second.
        2.  A justified and intense paranoia about internal insurgency
            or rebellion [cough, China, cough]
        3.  And if your country is both large and Democratic [cough, USA
            or India, cough] or extremely large and extremely paranoid
            [cough, China again, cough] then it’s going to be very hard
            for leaders to actually *understand**the thinking*of
            foreigners, in the scientific sense of making accurate
            predictions about their future actions.

2.  Universalist Extrapolation of the Character of the Native to the
    Alien:
    1.  Partly because they are preoccupied with these domestic
        concerns, Great State leaders take the erroneous intellectual
        short cut of assuming that foreigners are just human beings who
        think just like they do and who focus on the same priorities.
    2.  This tendency to a kind of passive, subconscious, egalitarian
        universalism is, of course, greatly amplified if you are
        actually an Egalitarian Universalist because that is effectively
        your official state religion [cough, USA, 'they're really just
        like us!', cough].
    3.  And human beings are naturally shiftless and disinclined to make
        serious, intimate study of foreigners, especially through the
        only truly effective method of cultural immersion. In reality it
        is very difficult to put oneself in another man’s shoes, and it
        is more difficult the more different that other man is. Leaders
        with political skills like to believe they are ‘people persons’
        and understand people in general, and combined with a
        characteristic overconfidence in their own abilities, they are
        are greatly tempted to underestimate real differences and to
        overestimate their actual ability to handle relations with
        foreigners.

3.  Differential Hierarchical Modes: Leaders in any country will tend,
    after a certain period of stability, to be drawn from an elite group
    of cognitively and politically gifted individuals who tend to go on
    to form caste-like classes with very distinct attributes from the
    bulk of the governed population. But, while the character and
    attitudes of the elites are rarely reflective of the populations
    from which they are drawn (indeed, they tend to go to great lengths
    to try and distinguish themselves from their hoi polloi), their
    *ways* of relating to the overall population, and as a consequence
    the particular character of the populist pressures that they face,
    can take many forms. Leaders from differing nations recognize this
    about each other, but elites from one country dealing with elites
    from another country tend to mentally model these pressures as
    following the same rules of the same game played by everyone. Such
    is hardly the case.
4.  Exorbitant Imperial Privilege: The leaders of certain powerful
    countries with unique histories become so used to cultural,
    linguistic, and ideological dominance throughout their domains that
    they genuinely start to think of it as ‘deserved’ and even
    ‘natural’. Russians who were never able to leave the Soviet Union
    but who could travel through the Warsaw Pact found that Russian
    thought, culture, and language dominated everywhere. Americans
    experience something similar when they travel throughout the West.
    And China is so large, and its people so sensitive to the
    [narcissism of small
    differences](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narcissism_of_small_differences),
    that it is experienced internally as being the Middle Kingdom Empire
    composed many dozens of ‘distinct’ countries and surrounded by
    future tributaries. Paradoxically, highlighting small, internal
    differences diminishes one’s imagination of the overall possible
    scope of human difference, and impairs the appreciation to
    comprehend the dramatically larger ones between one’s countrymen and
    foreigners.

Luttwak then chronicles a few key, and somewhat humorous, examples of
miscalculations regarding differing perceptions resulting from Great
State Autism. Folly through misundertanding is, of course, the essence
of a lot of humor and frequently-used trope that is an eternal spring
for popular comedies and was a favorite of Shakespeare. But, alas, the
consequences of this folly are not mild but instead serious and severe,
and all’s not well because it won’t end well.

The key is that Luttwak insists that China definitely suffers from this
autistic syndrome and therefore its leaders fail to recognize that other
nations attribute deeply malevolent motives to actions it perceives as
much more ‘innocent’.

**III. Chinese History**

Luttwak says that, even without the other reasons, China’s autism would
result from an idiosyncratic History as an isolated great civilization
surrounded by minor gangs of barbarians.

The essential features of modern diplomacy include, *inter alia*, the
formal equality between states of differing power and the equal immunity
of all ambassadors. But such habits of international relations were
developed in a European context, specifically between adjacent and
fluidly-aligned Italian states. This occurred mostly in the early
Renaissance era in a evolution which, some would argue, culminated in
the [Peace of Westphalia of
1648,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peace_of_Westphalia) concluding the
major [European Wars of
Religion](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_wars_of_religion).

China’s Historical experience was profoundly different and, Luttwak
argues, inspires a perspective which informs their attitudes to this
day. Briefly, the Chinese really do see themselves as deserving to be
The Middle Kingdom, restoring the condition they enjoyed at the very
peak of their power, and rightfully the center of all humanity.

While not utterly dominating all other nations, they would all ideally
be subservient or subordinate to China, in a hierarchy of concentric
circles of cultural and geographic proximity (with China at the top,
naturally), and where everyone pays tribute and demonstrates loyalty,
alleigance, and especially, submission to supremacy.

The Chinese name for this notion – which emerged under the Western Han
dynastry (206-9 BC) – is *Tianxia*or ‘all under heaven’, and which was
imagined in the past to radiate out from the person of the emperor. The
concept came about about a long, and ultimately victorious, conflict
with nomadic barbarians, and resulted in a ‘barbarian-handling
mentality’ that influenced Chinese thinking for centuries to come.

Barbarian handling has two essential elements, both of which are
particularly useful for undermining the barbarians subversively during
periods when they have the upper hand.

1.  Induced economic dependence; one might even say, ‘addiction’ or
    ‘corruption’.
2.  Indoctrination into the Confucian value system and the behavioral
    norms of the Han.

The effect is to make the barbarians “… psychologically as well as
economically dependent on the imperial radiance.” While considering
itself the superior, indeed supreme, form of sophisticated civilization,
Han states were nevertheless rarely militarily superior to the
horse-riding nomad barbarian tribes that surrounded their lands and
repeatedly came to invade and dominate them across many centuries. This
relative weakness is the reason they kept building parts of what
eventually became [The Great
Wall](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Wall_of_China). The Chinese, in
fact, through large parts of their History, resemble the Jews in their
impressive ability to survive culturally and preserve their unique
civilization and traditions even when frequently under the rule of
antagonistic conquerors. It also helps if your people tend to be [Market
Dominant Minorities](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_on_Fire) when
they’re outnumbered, especially when

The idea is that uncultured barbarian nations may be powerful and
violent and rule the roost over the Chinese today, but gradually China
will tempt them into losing control. Today, the US fills this role in
the CCP worldview. Here is Luttwak’s logical sequence:

> 1.  Initially, concede all that must be conceded to the superior
>     power, to avoid damage and obtain whatever benefits or at least
>     forbearance that can be had from it.
> 2.  Entangle the ruler and ruling class of the superior power in webs
>     of material dependence that reduce its original vitality and
>     strength, while proffering equality in a privileged bipolarity
>     that excludes every other power (“G-2″ at present)
> 3.  Finally, when the formerly superior power has been weakened
>     enough, withdraw all token of equality and impose subordination

Lovely! Is it any wonder that nobody trusts China?

AMENDATION: The ‘corruption through material dependency’ path seems, on
reflection, to resemble the path whereby federalism was undermined and
state diversity replaced with increasing governmental homogeneity. See,
e.g., Paul Moreno’s recent article, “[How the States Committed
Suicide.](http://www.realclearpolicy.com/articles/2013/12/13/how_the_states_committed_suicide_769.html)“
See also [*South Dakota v.
Dole*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Dakota_v._Dole).

**IV. Geo-Economic Resistance**

By “Geo-Economic” Luttwak refers to his thesis of how modern conflicts
will be conducted amongst Great Powers, in ways that resemble the Cold
War. The era of large conventional warfare between large nations was
over in WWII, and the importance of global trade and economic concerns
has expanded dramatically. He says:

> That is so because in our nuclear age, with any significant warfare
> between nuclear powers largely inhibited, the logic of strategy must
> find alternative, nonmilitary expression in “geo-economic” ways.

Mostly, I think, he means that since *effective* forms of combat would
lead to nuclear escalation, they are inhibited, and instead nations must
summon a willingness to violate an ideological devotion to unimpeded
international “free trade” [cough, USA, cough] and a readiness to use
restrictions of trade, sanctions, and even complete embargoes or
blockades, as levels of power against adversaries and in order to
accomplish their strategic goals. This is similar to the pressure the
Allies placed on Japan in the late 30′s and early 40′s. It really put a
huge amount of pressure on the Japanese. It certainly encouraged them to
start negotiations, and they kept coming to the table trying to find a
*modus vivandi*, which FDR never intended to give them. Eventually they
realized diplomacy was futile save for total capitulation, and thus,
Pearl Harbor.

While ‘almost unthinkable’ in these times of normal US-China relations,
Luttwak maintains that this form of geo-economic resistance is both
inevitable and will because the natural default position in the even the
Chinese ever commit any major act of aggression [cough, invading Taiwan,
cough].

But despite the US elite commitment to free trade – most intensely
expounded from its stronghold in the US Treasury Department –
intellectual support for geo-economic resistance is building if, for no
other reason, than the growing recognition of multiple downsides to the
Chinese trade relationship. The trade deficit, national debt
accumulation, de-industrialization and disemployment effects in a time
of weak labor markets, and currency manipulation issues are well known
and probably best covered by Michael Pettis. But Chinese merchandise is
also often shoddy or toxic. And anything electronic is full of exploits
installed by the PLA3 – China’s NSA. Not just [everything Huawei
makes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huawei#Security_concerns), but even
including [household electronic
appliances](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/12/trust-me.html).

The purpose and effect of geo-economic resistance or containment would
be to slow China’s economic growth. Luttwak says this is only an interim
solutions to preserve the world’s balance of power equilibrium for a
while until … something breaks down.

> A 4 percent annual growth rate may be both incompatible with the
> stability of the CCP regime and yet essential to preserve the U.S.
> position in the world.

Lovely again! But the bottom line is that no one trusts a China that
grows faster than that to not also grow their military power as quickly,
and no one trusts them not to use their military power to get what they
want.

**V. China Today, Germany Yesterday?**

In a chapter called “The Inevitable Analogy” Luttwak compares a rising
Chinese superpower to its closest Historical analogue, pre-WWI Germany,
which, as early as 1890 has already overtaken British primary in
countless academic, industrial, and economic trades and was utterly
unmatched in the critical chemical sector. I think this leaves out the
case of post-[Meiji
Restoration](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meiji_Restoration) Japan as
another possible analogy, but the comparison isn’t quite as exact. And
do I dare include the case of the US?

Unions were already causing major difficulties in Great Britain, but the
Germans avoided similar labor difficulties by constructing a strong
welfare state with soothed the main anxieties of their working classes.
Germany grew strong and rapidly across the board, finally overtaking the
British even in finance in the early 1910′s.

> Starting in 1890, under any realistic thirty-year projection, as the
> beneficiary of the world’s most advanced industries, best
> universities, richest banks, and the most harmonious society thanks to
> its welfare state, by 1920 Germany should have been altogether
> superior in every way to an increasingly antiquated Britain. Instead,
> by 1920, Germany was defeated, ruined, and destined for another
> quarter century of mounting disasters … The British paid a high price
> for their victory, but they did succeed in overturning the future
> before them…
>
> German strategic incompetence, a frequent companion of tactical
> genius, was the necessary precondition of catastrophic national
> failure, which necessarily started with hubris – like many Chinese
> now, many Germans at the time were plainly unhinged by the rapidity of
> their rise. But it was the British reaction to Germany’s rise that
> ensured the final outcome.

How did the late-Victorian-era British do it? Foresight, humility,
compromise for the sake of alliance, and expert diplomacy and
statesmanship. [Excuse me for a moment as I wipe the tears off my
keyboard in my woe at contemplating what greatness has been lost and
despite the fact that loss was not mine, though it was the world's.]

Between the end of the 19th century and 1904, Britain, recognizing the
emerging German threat, scrambled to make friends of past enemies, and
give up a great many just but disputed claims to negotiate as many
separate agreements as possible, especially with France and Russia. The
result was comprehensive
[encirclement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encirclement) and the
gradual strengthening of the anti-German Anglo-Franco-Russo alliance.

The obvious German countermeasure to the Russians would be to employ the
classic ‘leapfrog’ strategy to form an alliance with a powerful nation
on the opposite border of the adversary, and thus threaten the Russians
with a two-front war causing them to be distracted and disperse their
forces. The rising Japanese nation (who had already been making [evil
toy robots](http://i.imgur.com/0HK6CTG.gif) for a century) would be the
obvious candidate, a conclusion that would be vindicated later by their
[defeat of the
Russians](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russo-Japanese_War) by 1905
(partly due, indeed, to Russian over-concentration on the European
theater). But the British, Dark Sith Lords that they were, foresaw this
possibility, and thus agreed to a treaty with Japanese in 1902 – the
first truly equal Euro-Asian alliance – and thought it important enough
to abstain from helping their Russian ally during its conflict in the
Far East.

The bottom line is that the very existence of Germany’s growing strength
mobilized the British to oppose Germany globally. Luttwak claims:

> … only a militarily nonthreatening and diplomatic conciliatory grand
> strategy could have served Germany well – accelerating its peacful
> rise to new heights of cultural prosperity – is obvious in retrospect.
> But by 1907, and indeed long before, that best strategy had become
> simply unthinkable for Germany’s political elite ….

And, it seems, it’s unthinkable for the Chinese political elite today.

**VI. Sun Tzu Et Al Are Overrated**

> Remarkably undiminished by the actual record of Chinese history, with
> its repeated subjugations by relatively small numbers of primitive
> invaders, this great confidence in Chinese strategic abilities
> reflects the immense prestige of China’s ancient writings on
> statecraft and the art of war …

Luttwak respects Sun Tzu’s The Art of War for its concise expression of
timeless and paradoxical strategic truths, but, consistent with Great
State Autism, Chinese generals were only able to adapt its lessons
successfully when they were fighting *other Chinese* generals during
[periods of Warring
States](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warring_States_period).

> What is highly consequential, on the other hand, is that all the
> protagonists were Han – they were the rulers, generals, and advisors
> of rival Chinese states, all of whom operated within the same
> framework of cultural norms with similar objectives, priorities, and
> values. Because their inter-state relation were intra-cultural, there
> were exceptionally ample opportunities for diplomacy, espionage,
> secret operations, and political subversion alike, all of them both
> facilitated and bounded by a common language, a common mentality, and
> share cultural premises.
>
> It was much the same in Renaissance Italy whose states likewise
> engaged in intracultural war, diplomacy, and subversion on a
> continuous basis. The result in both cases was the swift alternation
> of conflict and cooperation between states that could make and break
> alliances with equal ease, fighting each other one day only to become
> allies the next – because there was no accumulation of ethnic, racial,
> or religious animosity between fellow Italians, or fellow Han Chinese.

Deep commonality also made practical and efficient the other classical
strategy of easy conquest via regime replacement. In an intracultural
context, it’s not difficult at all to cut off the head of a rival snake
and replace it with your own snake it. It’s just like replacing an
interchangeable part in a machine, and is likely to inspire much less
chauvinistic resistance among the locals. “Meet the new boss, same as
the old boss.”

To illustrate the fluidity of the political situation and the
Hobbesian[*Bellum omnium contra
omnesin*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bellum_omnium_contra_omnes) in a
typical time of Machiavellian warring states, I simply have to excerpt
the following passage in full. Try to follow along, if you can:

> In 294 BC, Mengchang was defeated in a court intrigue and fled to Wei.
> Qi and Qin then made a truce, which allowed Qi to attack the state of
> Song and allowed Qin to attack the reduced Han-Wei coalition. Six
> years later, Qi and Qin were planning a joint attack on the state of
> Zhao, when the Qi ruler was persuaded that that only Qin would
> benefit; instead of attacking Zhao, he started forming a coalition
> against Qin. In danger of isolation, Qin responded by giving back
> territory it had seized from Wei and Zhao.
>
> In 286 BC, Qi seized the entire state of Song, alarming the states of
> Qin, Zhao, Wei, and Yan, which promptly formed a coalition under the
> guidance of Qi’s very own former chief minister Mengchang back from
> his Wei exile. Yan next launched a powerful surprise attack on Qi,
> which also came under attack by Qin, Zhao, and Wei, losing most of its
> territory.
>
> Next, Zhao and Qin started a long war that allowed Qi to recover-and
> so it went on, and on, and on …

Luttwak detects three residue of the Art of War mentality of the
misapplication of intracultural norms to intercultural conflict.

1.  The presumption of unlimited pragmatism (or rational greed) in
    inter-state relations
2.  The tendency of Chinese officialdom to believe that long-unresolved
    disputes with foreign countries can be resolved by deliberately
    provoking a crisis
3.  An exaggerated faith in the power and efficacy of deception, as well
    as of the strategems and surprise moves that deception allows.

The effectivenes of deception and related methods is immensely increased
by proximity, familiarity, consanguinity, cultural homogeneity, and easy
access, all of which facilitate the acquisition of indispensable
in-depth knowledge of the adversary.

Cultural proximity, and the lure of regime replacement, encourages a
Chinese preference for high-risk but high-payoff tactics, like
assassination and covert actions, that have been relegated to relatively
minor roles in Western strategic thought and practice.

The problem with this, combined Chinese Great State Autism, is that they
one day they will certainly miscalculate and conduct what they imagine
to be a small, risky gamble which escalates into full-on conflict.

> Americans are pragmatic and commercial to a fault, but when attacked
> they behave most unpragmatically and uncommercially, with a decided
> preference for maximum force even when there are more restrained and
> cheaper options. Hence Chinese faith in clever Warring States
> statecraft, to gain much with just a little violence, an almost
> symbolic bold stroke perhaps, might collide catastrophically with an
> altogether more violent American response.

Rational Irrationality. “I said one little thing and bitch just go crazy
and releases the Kraken upside my head!” But the deterrent effect of
irrationally disproportionate responses to mild provocations only works
if the deterree knows, understands, and believes in that reputation.
Thus, Pearl Harbor. By most accounts, the Japanese certainly expected
war – they thought they were boxed in and had little choice – but they
didn’t expect their attacks to be met by the Americans with as utterly
cataclysmic an effort as was pursued; one that essentially ended by
insisting on a replacement of their entire form of civilization. Lesson
learned. You don’t fsck with FDR! And Obama? Well … let’s just say he’s
certainly no FDR.

But until provoked to break out its inner alpha Superman (RedGov – DoD),
the Americans are naive Clark Kent nice-guy beta chumps (BlueGov –
State, Treasury) who just want to be friendly and play nice with
everyone. The Americans was everybody to love them while their inner
Clark keeps pining hopelessly over that bitch Lois Lane who won’t even
give him the time of day. Ok, metaphor beyond exhausted.

> Americans, on the other hand, they see as especially native, also as
> strong and perhaps violent, but easily manipulated.
>
> … Given this estimate of American discernment, it could well be
> thought in Beijing that the simplest form of deception – mere
> concealment, as in the familiar injunction *Tao guang yang hui* “Hide
> one’s capacities and bide one’s time” – could be quite sufficient.
>
> Regrettable, it would appear that this assessment has so far proved to
> be largely correct. Over the years it was triumphantly confirmed as
> the Chinese watched with increasing incredulity the absence of any
> American attempt to impede the rise of China, and to the contrary, the
> many and varied U.S. contribution to China’s rapid economic growth,
> starting with the unilateral opening of the U.S. market to Chinese
> exports, and then the energetic promotion of China’s membership in the
> World Trade Organization, and all without demanding anything
> resembling full reciprocity.
>
> Indeed, Chinese unfriendly to the United States have never ceased to
> spin theories to explain the apparent benevolence of the United States
> as actually malevolent, in a projection of their own propensity for
> strategic deception.
>
> … Even Chinese who bear no hostility to Americans may still give
> credence to one of the malevolent explanations, simply because nothing
> else makes sense to them – why else would the U.S. government go out
> of its way to accelerate China’s rise?
>
> Themselves, newly emancipated from dogmatic ideology [it's impossible
> to suppress Chinese hard-nosed pragmatism permanently] not many
> Chinese appreciate even now how rigidly ideological is the framework
> of U.S. economic policy, especially when is comes to “free trade” –
> this is an ideology within which protection is viewed as a mortal sin
> rather than as a policy option …

It is indeed very hard to understand what America does sometimes, even
for Americans.

But the US is still very much in the last days of its enthusiastic,
naive, hopeful and ideological teenage phase. The American view is that
of the unidirectional and irreversible progress of Whig History. This is
especially true because, unlike during the founders’ generation in which
the entire educated class studied obsessively over the rise and fall of
dozens of Ancient states, current American elites are practically
totally disconnected from what [Nock called “The Grand
Tradition”](http://mises.org/daily/2765)

China, on the other hand, with it’s extremely ancient History,
understands [the cyclic nature of History](http://mises.org/daily/2765),
and the mechanisms whereby one historical condition leads to another
kind of circumstance until the process comes full circle in [eternal
recurrence of the
same](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eternal_return#Friedrich_Nietzsche).
This leads to a certain cynicism and fatalism akin to ‘this too will
pass’. With that kind of attitude, it’s very hard to prevent people from
grabbin’ everything they can while the grabbin’s good, an attitude that
itself leads to the behaviors that set off the vicious cycle:

> What also emerges from the historical evidence is the recurrent cycle
> that weakened dynasties and prepared the way for their destruction. A
> strong dynasty resulted in internal peace, law and order. Peace, in
> turn, resulted in economic growth, and therefore greater income and
> wealth differentiation, the rich of the local rich. Wealth
> differentiation in turn resulted in the transfer of land-ownership
> from small-holders to richer landlords. Having become sharecroppers
> and landless field laborers, the ex-peasants became bandits when
> harvests failed. Bandits in turn become local rebels, and local
> rebellions merged into large revolts when charismatic leaders emerged.
> None ws more so that Zhu Yuanzhang, who started off as a landless
> laborer, became a rebel against the Yuan dynasty of the Mongols, rose
> in rebel leadership ranks, and finally founded the Ming dynasty in
> 1368 as the Hongwu emperor.
>
> Along the way, there is an inner cycle of decay that starts with
> wealth differentiation, which leads to the rise of local oligarchs who
> increasingly control local government, which allows them to accumulate
> yet more wealth. And within that, there is the innermost cycle of
> officialdom itself, which starts with scholar-officials who take
> Confucianism and its obligations seriously, thereby ensuring law and
> order, which leads to wealth differentiation, which allows the rich to
> support their children through the examination system until they
> become official in turn, who then use their power to further enrich
> their families, until the system breaks down. Current social realities
> are probably not coincidental.

**VII. The Emerging Anti-China Coalition**

1.  **Australia:**
    1.  Australia, member of the Anglosphone Five Eyes Alliance and an
        extremely close security partner of the United States, is the
        main Western power to be located in East Asia’s geo-economic
        sphere. It is primarily interested in keeping the United States
        (whose competence they now question but capability they require)
        pivoted to the Asian theater and building a regional,
        multilateral coalition o security cooperation capable of
        containing a rising China.
    2.  It has been the main nation to strongly resist China’s
        preference of dealing bilaterally with other, smaller, less
        powerful nations one at a time – where it tries to leverage its
        huge advantage in size – and instead Australia insists that any
        Chinese negotiation with any nation in the region occur on as
        multilateral a basis as possible. It has, over recent years,
        been largely successful in this effort

2.  **Japan**:
    1.  Japan recently toyed with the idea of a Chinese detente,
        reconciliation, and rapprochement. It thought itself in the
        position of a small giant having to choose between two larger
        giants, and for various reasons the men in charge at the time,
        mostly those around Ozawa Ichiro [Japan BlueGov], were
        enthusiastic about switching alleigance from the US to China. It
        didn’t work out, mostly because China couldn’t be gracious
        towards Japan and seize the opportunity, and instead ended up
        pushing Japan away back into the loving arms of the US. Beyond a
        superiority complex in general, the animosity and antagonism
        towards the Japanese in particular is, for better or worse, an
        integral part of the way Chinese culture works. The CCP seems to
        know how to summon the nationalist dragon and ride it to
        popularity, but not how to put it back in Pandora’s box when
        it’s become inconvenient.
    2.  At the end of the day, the Japanese concluded they just couldn’t
        trust the secretive and scowling Chinese at all. Trust is, in
        some respects, generated by a track record of irrational
        altruism. A truly realpolitick world would be highly unstable
        with regards to alliances *unless* the dominant power tends to
        sincerely adhere to some kind of state religion that makes it
        treat its allies well *even**to a fault and at great personal
        cost*[cough, Israel, cough]. But when a great power is at the
        head of a very large and diverse global alliance, then one
        should not underestimate the symbolic value and deep influence
        that *displays of**irrational amounts of loyalty* has on other
        leery allies.
    3.  The Japanese turn back to the US necessarily coincided with a
        defensive posture *against*China. The Defense Ministry [Japan
        RedGov] assessed that China has unambiguously become the “main
        threat” to Japanese security, and that Japan needed to:
        1.  increase is own military strength
        2.  safeguard the U.S. alliance by overcoming longstanding
            controversies
        3.  broaden the basis of its own security by participating in
            the effort to build a collective security framework for East
            Asia as a whole

    4.  The Chinese lost whatever opportunity they may have had
        altogether when the situation went South on 07-SEP-2010 with the
        Senkaku fishing intrusion incident. Reckless Chinese reactions
        including attacks on Japanese-affiliated shops, arrests,
        interruption of rare-earth shipments, and provocative demands
        for official public apologies has the effect of crystallizing
        the underlying Japanese anxieties about China’s intentions.
    5.  Furthermore, [similar to what has been happening in the U.S. for
        a long
        time](http://www.gallup.com/poll/1597/confidence-institutions.aspx),
        the Japanese public’s trust and confidence in its various public
        institutions is deteriorating; *except for the military*.
        Reminiscent of the U.S. experience with Hurricane Katrina, the
        Japanese armed forces were almost the only effective instruments
        of the state in coping with the successive disasters unleashed
        by the [Tōhoku earthquake and
        tsunami](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_T%C5%8Dhoku_earthquake_and_tsunami)
        of 11-MAR-2011.
        1.  “Indeed, Japan’s armed forces visibly performed much more
            than adequately, acting compassionately (in conducting
            dignified burials), heroically (hosing water on reactors
            emitting dangerous levels of radiation), efficiently (in
            distributing food), uncomplainingly (in difficult, often
            dangerous conditions), and on the largest scale with ground,
            air, and naval elements – 100,000 personnel (40 percent of
            the total) were committed immediately.”
        2.  This experience has cause an attitudinal shift in Japanese
            public opinion, generating greatly increased pride in, and
            support for, the Armed Services, including, most
            importantly, a revived willingness to expand the military
            budget even in a time of severe fiscal difficulty. It also
            tends to align public attitudes with the preferences,
            policies, and positions of the Ministry of Defense, which
            are resolutely anti-China.
        3.  In the modern era, whenever the RedGov of a competent
            country is allowed to demonstrate its capabilities in
            non-insane endeavors [cough, Iraq and Afghansitan wars,
            cough], it generates a lot of respect and support for the
            Red side of politics and personality. BlueGov knows this,
            and it is a kind of dirty open secret that the BlueGov
            strategy is to refuse to allow RedGov to showcase its
            capabilities, or to try and hamstring its effectiveness when
            employed by means of operational constraints. As an example
            of this phenomena, Prime Minister Murayama Tomiichi, the
            first and only Socialist prime minister, refused to order
            the armed forces he has long opposed into action for the
            January 1995 [Great Hanshin
            earthquake](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Hanshin_earthquake)
            near Kobe.
        4.  Japanese perceptions towards the U.S. were also radically
            shifted because the U.S.’s immediate display of *irrational
            altruism*. The U.S. is very good at disaster-relief military
            P.R., but the P.R. is a incidental benefit and not the
            primary motivation. Americans are born do-gooders, they
            can’t help themselves, even when they only think they’re
            helping but not actually doing any good. It’s part of what
            makes America the genuine inheritors of the originally
            British tradition of Palmerstonian activism and
            interventionism; though, alas, the U.S. is distinctly
            lacking in
            [Palmerstons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_John_Temple,_3rd_Viscount_Palmerston)
            these days.
        5.  The U.S. Navy sent the USS Ronald Reagan, USS
            Chancellorsville, and the USS Preble right away to serve as
            air and resupply bases for rescue and relief helicopters.
            The Navy wont even let ‘alien’ U.S. Army or U.S. Air Force
            helicopters ever land on its ships, but it made an exception
            and provided the Japanese with the only usable airstrips
            anywhere near the disaster zone.
            1.  “The sailors aboard the Ronald Reagana and its escorts
                [were knowingly exposed to radiation at a rate of one
                month’s worth of naturally occurring radiation per
                hour](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-12-21/us-sailors-assisting-fukushima-clean-crippled-cancer)
                … Itself very sensitive to radiation dangers, the
                Japenese at large were profoundly moved by television
                imagery of American Sailors being decontaminated (with
                freezing water) while hard at work on the carrier’s deck
                in support of Japanese rescue helicopters. It is
                symtomatic that a very popular Japanese multivideo blog
                ont he rescue operations as a whole actually began with
                several videos of Ronald Reagan operations.

    6.  Since the cooperation of Russia is indispensable to the success
        of any potential embargo-style trade action of the coalition
        against China (because, with Russia, China could purchase all
        the fuel and raw materials it would need), Japan could win such
        cooperation for the coalition by finally abandoning its
        justified, but hopeless claims in territorial disputes with
        Russia. “It follows that if a China/anti-China world does emerge
        … Moscow will be its strategic pivot, conferring much leverage
        to its rulers, who would certainly use it to the full.”

3.  **Vietnam**
    1.  Few Westerners even know about the many wars fought between
        China and Vietnam, especially [the one shortly following the
        American-Vietnamese
        war](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sino-Vietnamese_War). But, to
        put it as concisely as possible, Despite the inherent
        compatibility of their Maoist political systems, the Vietnamese
        just hate the Chinese and are absolutely determined to do
        whatever is necessary to prevent even coming under Chinese
        domination, even if it means fighting in the jungles to the very
        last man. They are the Afghans of Southeast Asia. Don’t fight
        them; they’ll wear you out and you’ll lose; even if you’re as
        powerful as the U.S. or China.
    2.  The aftermath of the 1979 fighting included:
        1.  Ethnic antipathy
        2.  Historic resentment because of many centuries of Chinese
            domination
        3.  New bitterness caused by the war
        4.  Competition for regional influence in greater Indochina,
            starting with Cambodia (the invasion of which precipitate
            the Chinese response)
        5.  Borders disputed at many points
        6.  Incompatible maritime claims

    3.  All of this yielded a period of extremely cold relations without
        meaningful high-level contacts or resolution of disputes.
    4.  Vietnam also expelled as many Hoa (Vietnamese of ethnic Chinese
        extraction) as possible, who became ‘the boat people’, many of
        whom were resettled in the U.S. The Hoa were an Assimilated
        ‘Market Dominant Minority” that spoke Vietnamese, ate their
        cuisine, and even used Vietnamese names (after a lot of coercive
        encouragement). But the most successful and intelligent
        ‘Vietnamese’ immigrants to the U.S. are almost all Hoa.
        Remarkably, especially in the context of their adoptive Western
        country, they really do stick to their concocted Vietnamese
        identity and have nothing to do with the members of the local
        Chinese community. That’s what happens when you pursue an
        assimilation policy that forces people to forget their
        distinctive past and ancestry – which is, if you think about it,
        the exact polar opposite of multiculturalism.
    5.  But Vietnam needs a Great Power ally to be able to confront
        China, and the U.S. is the obvious candidate. The U.S. was quick
        to oblige. Hillary Clinton, no timid, shrinking violet, went to
        Hanoi in 2010 and asserted that freedom of navigation in the
        seas surrounding Vietnam is a U.S. “national interest” and
        furthermore declared:
        1.  “‘legitimate claims to maritime space in the South China Sea
            should be derived solely from legitimate claims to land
            features’ a new position that undermines China’s claims to
            the entire ocean area, while supporting Vietnam’s.”

    6.  This contrasts with Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi’s angry
        response, “It is all ours, there is nothing to discuss.” Damn,
        that’s pretty bold, but also not any way to win friends.
    7.  To make the point, On 10-AUG-2010, the US destroyer *John S.
        McCain* [heh] docked in central Vietnam and with the carrier USS
        George Washington conducted joint military exercises with the
        Vietnamese Navy, which, predictably, outraged the Chinese.
        Chinese media insisted that Vietnam “send a powerful message of
        friendly to China to balance the effect of the exercise” and I
        can just imagine [the Vietnamese
        response](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reply_of_the_Zaporozhian_Cossacks).
    8.  The Bottom line is, again consistent with their Autism, the
        Chinese underestimate the fanatical attachment of the defiant
        Vietnamese to the jealously-guarded independence. They make
        pragmatic economic arguments to the Vietnamese which inevitably
        fall on deaf ears. Luttwak:
        1.  “Such exaggerated faith in (nondialectical) materialism is
            just as naive as its opposite would be – if government
            habitually subordinated security and power concerns to
            moneymaking, human history would have evolved very
            differently, in an altogether better fashion, with fewer
            follies perhaps, and certainly with fewer crimes. Alas, it
            is only in Homer’s version of the Trojan Wat that heroic
            warriors, sensibly enough, fight for pretty captives,
            silver, and well-wrought armor, instead of the much uglier
            ideologies and political compulsions or ever personal
            dictatorial ambitions that actually cause modern wars.”

4.  **South Korea:**Don’t bother with South Korea in the coalition;
    they’ll just undermine your will and weaken the collective resolve.
    They’re the ‘toughest pussies in the world’, geopolitically
    speaking. They’ll never stand up to North Korea or China, need China
    to maintain a reliable leash on the North, and for cultural and
    historical reasons, would be perfectly find fitting into the new
    Chinese Tianxia. Anyway, instead of standing up for itself when it
    actually counts, South Korea is too busy being completely obsessed
    with hating the Japanese and is eager to pursue quarrels that are
    entirely devoid of strategic significance. That’s when they aren’t
    contemplating divorcing the longstanding but semi-humiliating
    one-sided alliance with the U.S. Forget them.
5.  **Mongolia**: Not much more that a huge buffer state between China
    and Russia with vast coal reserves. Mongolia has their own ‘Choose
    between two giants’ game to play, and they’ve been playing it for
    decades, siding mostly the Russians. Mongolia knows that, without
    Russian support, that should their Southern neighbor ever get the
    desire, China would crush them instantly. It is also key to bringing
    the Russians onside, especially if the Russian government feels it
    needs to “preserve its control of [resource rich] eastern Siberia in
    the long run] ([not a crazy thing about which to be
    paranoid](www.geocurrents.info/geopolitics/new-york-times-list-potential-new-countries-others-well)
    – see \#10). To bring poor, economically undeveloped Mongolia into
    the coalition shouldn’t require much more than the promise of
    significant new injections of foreign investment to include advisers
    and resource development companies.
6.  **Indonesia**: Far away and mostly only concerned with the ‘dual
    loyalty’ of the local, market-dominant Chinese population, and, of
    course for a hugely populated nation of a thousand islands stretched
    over a continent’s worth of space, all those maritime disputes.
    Indonesia, unlike Vietnam, prefers vague avoidance to concrete
    defiance, and would probably maintain a kind of ambiguous neutrality
    with regards to China today has China not, yet again, pushed
    Indonesia away with it’s alarming, abrasive, and aggressive
    behaviors. They continues to make maximal maritime claims, and, as
    they typically do with the boats of many other neighboring
    countries, conducted all sorts of harassment operations. Luttwak
    says, “There is no audible, ‘who lost Indonesia’ debate in Beijing,
    but there should be.”
7.  **The Philippines:**
    1.  A huge failure of the George Bush Sr. administration occurred on
        16-SEP-1991 when the Philippine Senate votes 12 to 11 to reject
        extending the 45 year old treaty with the U.S. that would have
        leased [Subic Bay Naval
        Station](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U.S._Naval_Base_Subic_Bay)
        and to the U.S. for another decade and justified the repair of
        Clark Air Force Base, which has been damaged by a volcanic
        eruption. Clark and Subic had, until then, been the major
        American logistics and power-projection forward facilities in
        the whole Western Pacific. Except for some occasional Special
        Forces training and counter-terrorism assistance, almost the
        entirely of US Forces left the islands.
    2.  And the Philippines, being major commodity exporters to China,
        had spent the next two decades growing gradually close to China
        both commercially and diplomatically.
    3.  But, can you guess what the Chinese did next? Sure you can. Same
        old story – overbearing and threatening conduct with regards to
        island and marine territorials disputes and harassment of
        Philippine shippers and fisherman. This has pushed the
        Philippines away and back into a protective relationship with
        the U.S.
    4.  With enemies like China, The U.S. almost can’t screw the
        coalition-building up no matter how hard it tries. It can just
        sit back and let the pissed-off countries come to it. If any
        push is needed at all, the U.S. merely has to argue, “Hey, take
        a lot at what they’re doing, what do you think that’s about?
        Duh, they want your island, your waters, your oil and gas. They
        want complete control and Naval dominance of all the marine
        Lines Of Communication that are critical to you. They will use
        that control to help themselves at your expense and extort every
        concession from you, but more importantly, to make sure no one
        can come in to help you even when you’ve realized you’ve made a
        mistake allowing them to achieve that much control without
        resistance”. This argument, apparently, has been extremely
        persuasive with the Filipinos. But, fundamentally, it’s China’s
        actions that make it persuasive.
    5.  The generous and ally-courting U.S. thought it would help the
        Filipinos out with regards to their problem with boats being
        harasses by medium-sized Chinese patrol boats. While direct
        military-to-military Vessel sales to the Philippine Navy were
        not authorized at the time, on 13-MAY-2011, it nonetheless
        received shipment of a [Hamilton-class “Weather High Endurance
        Cutter”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamilton-class_cutter)
        from the U.S. Coast Guard (under DHS, not DoD) under a [Foreign
        Military Sales
        credit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Foreign_Military_Financing).
        (i.e. we gave it to them). One boat? Is that a big deal? What
        kind of boat are we talking about? Luttwak:
        1.  “The designation ‘cutter’ hardly describes accurately a
            substantial warship of 3,250 tons that will be by far the
            largest patrol ship in the Philippine Navy with a crew of
            167, exceptional endurance (14,000 miles unrefueled, or in
            the alternative, extremely long periods on station), modern
            armament (including the 20-mm Phalanx), and a helicopter
            hangar and deck. … The transfer was described as “an
            expression of America’s commitment to help the Philippines
            protect its maritime domain.”

8.  **Norway (Norway? Norway!)**: Some Norwegians over which the
    government of Norway has no control gave the Noble Peace prize to a
    Chinese dissident, Liu Xiaobo. That pissed China off, which couldn’t
    understand how the government of Norway couldn’t just make it not
    happen, and thus retaliated commercially by spoiling the importation
    of delicious Norwegian refrigerated smoked salmon. China also tried
    to lobby all the diplomats from all the other countries to protest
    the award and withhold their ambassadors from the ceremony, which,
    surprise!, ended up just pissing everyone off and making the Chinese
    diplomats laughing stocks that looked like utter amateurs.

\VIII. **The Three China Policies of the United States.**

One of the major problem with the U.S. democracy structure and the
internal organization of the government bureaucracy is a distinct
inability to coordinate the activities of various agencies under a
single coherent strategy to advance ‘the national interest’. From an
insider’s perspective, one often starts to think that there *is* no
single coherent strategy, and no *single* metric or philosophy of what,
in fact, ‘*the national interest’ even is*. The judgment and
reasonableness necessary for sophisticated statecraft requires an
understanding of the reality of trade-offs and a concept of how to
balance opposing forces and optimally allocate efforts and resources.
Good leadership involves having a clear vision of the overall objective
and communicating that consistent, coherent vision clearly to
subordinates so that they don’t work at cross-purposes. Good management
requires the authority to make it happen.

And the U.S. system, while full of competent, talented professional, and
which even has plenty of excellent leaders, lacks this sort of good
leadership and good management where it really counts – at the top. Part
of the problem is not really the fault of any administration. The design
of the bureaucracies, [the incomprehensibility of their tasks to all but
expert
specialists](http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/10/17/inaccessible-is-ungovernable/),
and [the practical independence from political control that has been
solidified over
time](http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/13/robert-moldbug-kaus-1979/)
makes the whole scheme effectively unmanageable.

But another part of the problem is that the democratic political
environment is such that the act of trading-off one value for another is
exploitable rhetorically by one’s opponents and thus politically risky.
The government is not at all a rational maximizer of utility, equalizing
the marginal rates of transformation of budgets to citizen benefit
across all domains (there’s a great table to this effect in ‘The
Economics of Health and Health Care’ by Folland, S., A.C. Goodman and M.
Stano – 2012). Combine this with a desire to keep certain aspects of the
real national strategy secret not just from foreigners, but from the
opposition public at large, and the inevitability of leaks, and top
leadership find it impossible to clearly communicate directions to all
his subordinates.

So, what happens is that the bureaucracy usually runs on autopilot, and
there’s nothing the politicians can or want to do about that. The
problem then is that each bureaucracy tends to focus obsessively on its
narrow range of missions and authorities, and to pursue actions within
its own bailiwick vigorously and with an unreasonable rigorousness. And
occasionally such disparate efforts overlap and the agencies find
themselves in contest and competition with one another, contradicting
and often cancelling out each others’ efforts. It’s a gigantic mess. To
see how it works, let’s explore the three China policies.

1.  **Treasury: Vigorous Promotion of China’s Economic Growth**
    1.  The Treasury wants cheap, trade-surplus-recycled, savings-glut
        capital for both it’s regulatory-capturers on Wall Street and
        the deficit-addicted government. This is not to mention all
        those sweet government-finance, revolving-door, lucrative
        employment opportunities. Everybody gets to be a VP with a high
        six-figure (at least) salary at some too-big-to-fail Investment
        Bank is they happen to do what’s helpful to the banks in the
        course of their public employment. Which they’re especially
        likely to do if they *actually believe* in the ideology most
        useful to the banks.
    2.  The Treasury looks the other way at Chinese currency
        manipulation which keeps the Yuan chronically undervalued, and
        in general is indifferent to the damaging effects to the
        condition of U.S. industry or the manufacturing sector.
    3.  US properity and competitiveness are due in large part to being
        able to remain on the cutting edge technological frontier which
        is absolutely dependent on ensuring the security of proprietary
        information that represents billions in sunk costs. But, “No
        part of the U.S. government is charged with safeguarding [non
        military] U.S. technology from diffusion to China …” “… there is
        no U.S. policy to control the diffusion of non-military
        aerospace technology, or even to monitor the process.”
    4.  The Chinese are highly motivated to do whatever is necessary,
        legal or illegal, to encourage American companies to sell (or
        just steal) the long-term national commercial advantage away for
        short-term gain, and the U.S. government, and certainly not the
        free-trade idolizing Treasury Department, isn’t doing anything
        to prevent it. On the contrary, Treasury works to encourage it,
        going out of its way to facilitate the process. It didn’t help
        that former Secretary Geithner was once a student in China and
        former China specialist at the profitable firm of … Kissinger
        Associates Inc. We are doomed.

2.  **State: Confronting China**(But keep in mind, this was the
    *Clinton* State Department. You know she’s [got what it takes to
    sell real estate](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FWfKoc-MKM).) The
    State department has been working feverishly to implement the
    ‘[Pivot to
    Asia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/East_Asian_foreign_policy_of_the_Barack_Obama_administration)‘
    (and away from [MENA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MENA), which is,
    insanely, not yet accomplished but should have been completed years
    ago). It is doing this in a manner similar to the British prior to
    WWI, to be very generous to build as broad and strong a potential
    anti-China coalition as possible. The new U.S. base in Darwin
    Australia is certainly reflective of the new focus on containment in
    the region. It has also been continuing the Bush administrations
    Herculean efforts to build a friendly relationship with natural
    China-rival India. But India is a mess and everything happens at the
    most glacial pace imaginable.
3.  **DoD:**It’s always best when talking about the Department of
    Defense to be consistent with the military mentality and just
    outline DoD tasks in brief bullet points.
    1.  China is certainly designated as the new prospective “Main
        Enemy”. That helps communicate priorities to planners and
        intelligence officers.
    2.  Defend against Chinese cyber operations.
    3.  Support Containment Throughout the Region
    4.  Annual Joint Exercises, training, support, and military
        equipment sales to anti-China coalition members. Constant
        engagement and exposure.
    5.  Enter into Mutual Defense Security Cooperation Agreements.
    6.  Carrier Diplomacy with ship visits.
    7.  New Bases with employment of locals.
    8.  Military Officer Exchanges to build lifelong personal bonds.

**IX. Threats To The Persistence of the CCP**

1.  Increasing social tensions generated by extreme income and wealth
    inequality in a country inconveniently stuck with an egalitarian
    official ideology [sounds vaguely familiar somehow ...]
2.  The frequent riots against local government authorities provoked by
    land expropriations above all, among other varieties of misconduct.
3.  Ethnic unrest with a national and political character amongst
    Mongolians, Tibetans, or Muslims.
4.  The broader threat to morale and cohesion within the CCP that arises
    from ideological bankruptcy of a nominally Communist regime very
    largely dedicated to the advancement of capitalism.
5.  The ever-increasingly disaffection of the better educated in the
    population, who aspire to the freedoms of their global peers made
    familiar by new and old forms of communication … “they can censor
    boks that address politics directly, but they cannot possibly keep
    out the ultimately more deeply subversive novels of Conrad, Dickens,
    or
    [Manzoni](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Betrothed_%28Manzoni_novel%29),
    to name a few…”

Luttwak expounds on social instability:

> China’s rulers and their security officials are themselves far from
> confident in the stability of their rule, judging by their hysterical
> overreaction to the faint threat of a social media “Jasmine
> revolution” in the spring of 2011. Perhaps they are just being
> prudently overcautious, but perhaps they are better informed about the
> fragility of their rule than outside observers.

CCP leadership apparently has concerns over another threat to their
fragile power base:

> Unsurprisingly, U.S. military services … are inclined … to exaggerate
> greatly the strength of the PLA’s forces already in being. For one
> thing, they still do not have a joint forces command above the
> military region level, that is, no unity of command at the national
> level, no instantaneous ability to concentrate the forces of different
> military regimes, or even to coordinate their actions. This makes no
> sense at all operationally, but it is a very sensible arrangement for
> the unelected leaders of the CCP, who want to command the soldiers
> instead of being dominated by them.

It would hilarious if some CCP officials actually continued to retain
this increasingly unnecessary and obsolete practice in part because they
read Luttwak’s *Coup d’Etat*.

**X. The Peaceful Rise Guarantees and Conclusion**

Before abruptly changing course in 2008, China attempted to calm
everyone’s nerves by issuing forth a policy document in 2005 that
attempted to communicate their non-threatening intentions about what
they planned on doing with their rapidly expanding power. China would:

1.  Not Seek to create its own world system, but would rather join in
    the existing system.
2.  Not Seek regional, let alone global, hegemony, hence military forces
    will not threaten or deliberately intimidate other countries.
3.  Not Use force over territorial and maritime disputes, but resolve
    them diplomatically.
4.  Not Use the economy to accumulate military strength as the Soviet
    Union has done.
5.  Not Disrupt the economies of other countries for its own benefit. It
    would seek to repress the theft of intellectual property while
    respecting the common rules on international trade.
6.  Peacefully reabsorb Hong Kong and Macau, and moreover, so long as
    Taiwan’s identity as a province of China was not challenged, no
    force would be used against the island.

Luttwak comments:

> “… these reassuring promises were presented by successive Chinese
> leaders in credible ways, and – more important – because actual
> Chinese conduct kept faith with these promises in the years 2005-2008,
> there was no ‘natural’ reaction to China’s extremely rapid rise: no
> elements, even tacit, of any anti-Chinese alliance emerged on its
> periphery, and there was not even any speculation about the attempt to
> deliberately slow China’s economic growth.”
>
> “Until 2009 the credibility of the Peaceful Rise grant strategy was
> reaffirmed by actual Chinese conduct. But that is no longer true of
> course …”

Future Historians will certainly try and look back and discover the
sequence of events and decisions that led to China’s shift in behavior.
Perhaps it was the financial crisis and the feeling that the moment of
leapfrogging over a peaked and declining West was finally on the
horizon. Perhaps it was an internal squabble amongst political elites or
wealthy families. Perhaps leftist-nationalist popular fervor took over
and the temptation towards aggressiveness could not be resisted, or that
having been compelled by circumstance to issue guarantees now seemed
more ‘humiliating’ than crafty.

It will be interesting to read what those Historians uncover.
Nevertheless, Luttwak makes a good case that [*Alea iacta
est*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alea_iacta_est), and, short of an
unexpected dramatic slowing of the growth of the Chinese economy, some
new form of East Asian Cold War is coming upon us all.

The coming years will definitely bring some very interesting times. The
Chinese proverb goes, “寧為太平犬，不做亂世人”: “It’s better to be a dog
in a peaceful time than be a man in a chaotic period.” Let us hope that
it remains better to be men.

### Share this:

-   [Twitter](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")
-   [Facebook](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?share=facebook "Share on Facebook")
-   

### Like this:

Like Loading...

This entry was posted in
[Uncategorized](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/ "View all posts in Uncategorized").
Bookmark the
[permalink](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/ "Permalink to Review of “The Rise of China vs. The Logic of Strategy” by Edward Luttwak").

[← Contracting but Corruscating
Elysia](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/14/contracting-but-corruscating-elysia/)

[Sound and Fury; But No Reaction
→](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/26/sound-and-fury-but-no-reaction/)

### 31 Responses to *Review of “The Rise of China vs. The Logic of Strategy” by Edward Luttwak*

1.  ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/93051eadd6c2bd2d2315b64bab05ffc6?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    [spandrell](http://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com) says:

    [December 17, 2013 at
    14:45](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1243)

    Talk out there these days is that Zhou Yongkang (recently
    apprehended evil boss of the security forces) was the mastermind
    behind last year’s over-the-top anti-Japanese riots, themselves a
    cover up to try to force the state of emergency and prevent Xi
    Jinping from assuming the presidency. Xi did disappear suddenly 2
    weeks last September, rumors he was hiding, or hurt during an
    assassination attempt.

    Jiang Zemin is the boss of that faction, and widely known as the
    root of all evil in China. He was also who pushed for anti-Japanese
    propaganda to become an integral part of the education and
    entertainment system. With Bo Xilai and Zhou Yongkang gone, his
    faction won’t last much longer, one thoroughly purged China might
    perhaps slow down with the aggressiveness.

    Some points are quite inaccurate: there’s no issue with ethnic
    Mongolians in China. Zilch. Tibetans and Uyghurs certainly are. And
    the idea of Tianxia precedes the Han dynasty for some time. It
    starts with the old Zhou kings, who brought Tian worship.

    Luttwak is a better historian than prophet. China has Korea in their
    hand, nice relations with Russia, and the only neighbors actually
    willing to confront them are Japan and Vietnam. Vietnam sucks, as
    does most SEA, who just doesn’t have the resources to avoid being
    drawn into the Chinese economic sphere. Japan should dig deep
    trenches and wait until the Chinese economy unravels, which it very
    well might.

    I’d say the actual pivot is the American State Department. China
    wants to sell G2, is it that bad of a deal?

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1243#respond)

    -   ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0d0feba1fba4ab0c1368e612568837be?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        Matt says:

        [December 17, 2013 at
        22:50](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1248)

        Good point about Korea, spandrell.

        Most Western analysts can be quite myopic when it comes to
        Korea. They always seem surprised that the South Koreans might
        not despise and have contempt for North Korea and China like
        they themselves do. They don’t seem to understand that North
        Koreans are the same people as the South Koreans, and that Korea
        has had relatively good relations with China for a while, as in
        centuries. The Chinese even helped them beat back a Japanese
        invasion. Also, Korea is a direct neighbor of China and has an
        obvious incentive to have friendly relations with China.

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1248#respond)

    -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) says:

        [December 18, 2013 at
        02:05](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1257)

        In Re Mongolians: Luttwak puts this oddly negligible instance as
        an exemplary anecdote in his notes, “Concurrently, ethnic riots
        continue in the Inner Mongolians Autonomous Region: the killing
        of a traditional herder has opened a wider contention over
        Mongol control of Mongol lands. (Southern Mongolian Information
        Center, “Herders take to the streets, four arrested,”) [story
        link here](http://smhric.org/news_378.htm).

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1257#respond)

        -   ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/93051eadd6c2bd2d2315b64bab05ffc6?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
            [spandrell](http://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com) says:

            [December 18, 2013 at
            03:27](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1259)

            That is more akin to Han fighting for their land than
            Tibetans burning themselves for the Dalai Lama. Mongolians
            don’t have a functional nationalist movement. I’ve met
            plenty and you seldom find the zeal that all Uyghurs have.
            China isn’t suppressing their culture either. Not being
            Muslim helps

            I don’t think internal ethnic conflict can cause much
            problems, unless sellouts such as this go mainstream.

            [http://www.scmp.com/news/china-insider/article/1357661/han-journalist-dons-uygur-doppa-security-checks-act-support](http://www.scmp.com/news/china-insider/article/1357661/han-journalist-dons-uygur-doppa-security-checks-act-support)

            [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1259#respond)

            -   ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/354841dbef1affc63a4ca610fdd50a5b?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
                asdf says:

                [December 18, 2013 at
                05:22](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1261)

                Nothing about the Mondol’s history screams nationalist
                movement to me. Bunch of bickering tribal horse archers.
                Everyone once in awhile they come together to loot as a
                group, but its just a temporary alliance of convenience.

                [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1261#respond)

    -   ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/600af3bc312c80e196f608fb6093d0a9?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        [Richard](http://richardkulisz.blogspot.com) says:

        [March 2, 2014 at
        08:55](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3166)

        You’re seriously lacking in insight. You’re following this
        Luttwack guy but all he’s saying was already summed up by the
        researchers who studied the Zero Determinant solutions to the
        Prisoner’s Dilemma. Specifically the part where the reactionary
        Prisoner’s Dilemma turns into an Ultimatum Game with rational
        negotiation if both sides try to manipulate the others’
        behaviour using ZD solutions. Does this sound familiar? The …
        hmm I suppose the rest hasn’t been published yet. But the rest
        of what you’re saying is that Narcissistic (ie, neo-con)
        solutions don’t work in the real work because they’re not
        universalizable. Whereas Moralist solutions (friendship,
        cooperation, harmony, these are Moralist values) do work because
        they’re universalizable. Though there are two other families of
        solutions that work just as well, any family of solution that’s
        universalizable will beat one that doesn’t since the latter
        artificially creates entropy. Meaning: it fucks you over.

        Now I’m using tedious intellectual language for this but the
        basic concepts are so simple they’re taught to every 12 year
        old. And for that reason, they’re scorned by you pompous
        “serious” people. You treat as complicated and advanced concepts
        which every non-retarded adolescent (“don’t be an asshole, don’t
        be a jerk”) manages to assimilate. But I suppose you belong in
        the retarded 30% who just doesn’t get it.

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3166#respond)

        -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
            [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) says:

            [March 2, 2014 at
            12:45](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3167)

            Thank you for your very civil input.\
             Yes, me, and everyone running strategy policy in all of
            these countries are all well trained in and aware of all
            these game theoretical considerations.\
             But when you actually look at collective human behavior, it
            turns out you simply can’t ignore certain particular
            irrational and cultural human inputs into the equation. You
            also can’t ignore the fact of massive amounts of uncertainty
            which itself expands rapidly the further out you forecast.\
             Have a great day, you ass.

            [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3167#respond)

2.  ![image](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/54c17540d811fb1d007f3a18f08e8246?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    [Magus
    Janus](https://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100005500657738)
    says:

    [December 17, 2013 at
    16:01](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1245)

    This was excellent, well done Handle, one of your best. I already
    have Coup on my reading list, I’m going to add both Grand Strategy
    books as well.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1245#respond)

3.  ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ab060e29ef01469165090432a3e2889e?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    [Steve Sailer](http://www.iSteve.blogspot.com) says:

    [December 17, 2013 at
    21:48](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1247)

    One thing that has changed since 2008 or so is the new attitude that
    oil or gas might be found anywhere, so it’s a good idea to have as
    much territory as possible because who knows when it will be
    profitable to frack the seabed around some rocks you prudently
    claimed back in the day.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1247#respond)

    -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) says:

        [December 18, 2013 at
        00:30](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1252)

        Willkommen Steve Sailer, and thanks for the link. I know you
        will make good use of my meager contribution to your
        panhandling. Keep up the great work!

        You make a good point about the new optimism about hydrocarbons.
        However, the argument cuts both ways. The question is always
        whether the expected benefits of acquiring or fighting over some
        god-forsaken rock are worth the costs in terms of damaged
        foreign relations. But the nation the rock is being taken *from*
        also has the same reasons to value that rock even more than they
        did before the innovations in extractive technology. So, since
        the winner’s gain is the loser’s loss, then the greater the
        incentive, the greater the provocation and response. It seems to
        me to cancel out.

        All additional territory is always potentially valuable in some
        way, if even as mere military outposts for surveillance, power
        projection, logistics, and rapid response. All those tiny South
        Pacific atolls are still very useful for the U.S., even without
        oil and gas.

        The Naval portion of the Chinese long-term ‘Domains’ strategy is
        to exclusively dominate the Western Pacific, intimidating all
        other regional nations to disassociate with American, and thus
        pushing the U.S. 7th Fleet out to Hawaii so that the Pacific has
        to be shared between two great powers once more. Last time that
        didn’t work out so well.

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1252#respond)

4.  ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f89fcb6e402e3e3318f489e7b254e570?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    Orthodox says:

    [December 17, 2013 at
    23:10](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1249)

    There are rumors that the CCP wants to remove Maoist thought, in
    which case it needs nationalism. They are trying to push the “spirit
    of Lei Feng” as a replacement for religion, but it is mainly viewed
    as a joke by the public.

    Zhou was Bo’s patron and the Communist Youth faction (which provided
    the former and current premier) is systematically taking them (the
    reds) out. The recent investigation into the state-owned oil
    companies is part of it: the companies are controlled by the red
    faction and used to advance red party members. Maoist websites and
    papers have been shuttered as well. Maybe they will stage a
    comeback, but it looks like the Maoists are on the way out. And even
    though the public generally dislikes the CCP, the public was more
    disturbed by Bo Xilai’s Maoist nostalgia, so removing Mao would
    probably increase the popularity of the CCP.

    Anti-Japanese propaganda is off the charts. Chinese protesters beat
    a Chinese man into a coma for driving a Japanese car as part of
    riots over the Japanese government purchase of the Diaoyu Islands.
    There’s a lot of hate for the CCP too though, and it’s hard to guess
    what would happen if a more serious incident turn protests into
    riots.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1249#respond)

    -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) says:

        [December 18, 2013 at
        00:21](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1250)

        Following the machinations and speculating upon the intrigues of
        the Chinese court is enough to make anyone’s head spin. I think
        Luttwak would argue, however, that it all pales in significance
        to the *material* base of economic, political, and military
        power, and the expectation (on all sides) of the growth of
        future power imbalances.

        Nevertheless, where internal politics do matter is in terms of
        elevating wise statesmen who understand the nature of foreign
        relations and will take care to avoid unnecessary provocations.
        If ‘the inevitable analogy’ to Germany has much validity, then
        the turn towards nationalism combined with an overly-easy
        ability to marshal clearly intense and violent public hatred for
        members of particular ethnic groups does not bode well.

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1250#respond)

5.  ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0d0feba1fba4ab0c1368e612568837be?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    Matt says:

    [December 18, 2013 at
    00:27](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1251)

    > The Chinese, in fact, through large parts of their History,
    > resemble the Jews in their impressive ability to survive
    > culturally and preserve their unique civilization and traditions
    > even when frequently under the rule of antagonistic conquerors. It
    > also helps if your people tend to be Market Dominant Minorities
    > when they’re outnumbered

    They don’t really resemble the Jews at all. As Luttwak writes, the
    Chinese been isolated and localized for most of their history. Their
    interactions have been mainly with relatively small barbarian tribes
    that they’ve vastly outnumbered. The Jews on the other hand have
    been international and migratory, and have been outnumbered by their
    various hosts, and they’ve had to deal diplomatically, so to speak,
    with their hosts’ states which were themselves in diplomatic
    relations with other states.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1251#respond)

6.  ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0d0feba1fba4ab0c1368e612568837be?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    Matt says:

    [December 18, 2013 at
    00:43](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1255)

    > Likewise, Luttwak contends that at the higher levels of Grand
    > Strategy the logic of ‘get big or get stomped‘ reverses
    > paradoxically. If you pursue military agrandizement so
    > monomaniacally and consistently with realpolitick that you start
    > to seriously threaten your neighbors and competitors then, if they
    > are smart enough and act in time, you will provoke them into
    > forming an alliance of resistance dedicated to doing whatever is
    > necessary short of nuclear war, but including crushing your
    > economy, to prevent you from getting big enough to dominate.
    > Luttwak says that the ‘realists’ are in fact fooling themselves
    > with a delusion in regards to imagining themselves as actors with
    > ‘free will‘ and that the sequence of international power politics
    > is much more deterministic as all the actors are in fact, “…
    > trapped by the paradoxes of the logic of strategy, which imposes
    > its own imperatives …”

    Luttwak either misunderstands or misrepresents realism and the logic
    of “get or get stomped.” It’s either because he’s getting on in
    years, or because he’s deliberately being manipulative.

    The logic of realism does not “reverse paradoxically.” Just because
    you don’t pursue military aggrandizement doesn’t mean your neighbors
    and competitors won’t try to crush you and form alliances and so
    forth. That’s the logic of realism: the world is anarchic and
    there’s ultimately really no telling what people will do.

    Luttwak’s view is actually more “deterministic” than the realism he
    criticizes here since he assumes certain determined responses are
    given that realism doesn’t assume.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1255#respond)

    -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac79c0bc080e19fbe467adb02369dfa?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        peppermint says:

        [December 19, 2013 at
        07:10](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1272)

        Neither Kissinger’s Realpolitick or its negation are good
        strategies to follow all the time. This should be obvious.

        Like Moldbug said, reason is reason, and foregoing reason for a
        formula is not a good idea. Carlyle said it first (part VIII of
        The Latter-day Pamphlets), of course.

        At least when leftists lobotimize themselves for a formula, that
        formula gets concrete benefits for them personally.

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1272#respond)

        -   ![image](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/58c98a93d5de4c375458e48c1e12657d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
            Mark says:

            [December 20, 2013 at
            22:31](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1283)

            Realpolitick doesn’t prescribe specific strategies or
            formulae to be used all the time.

            [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1283#respond)

7.  Pingback: [On The Rise of China vs. the Logic of
    Strategy](http://theelectriccamel.com/2013/12/17/on-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy/)

8.  ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cb11f9dbf86ea5d5cd66180bc9315fc8?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    VXXC says:

    [December 18, 2013 at
    15:30](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1264)

    On the subject of the Confederacy nothing was pre-determined. They
    had no national leadership and there was never Unified Command until
    Feb 1865. At several points they might have inflicted such damage as
    to get the North to make peace.

    [http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A2001.05.0007%3Achapter%3D4.11](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A2001.05.0007%3Achapter%3D4.11)

    On the subjects above: why is any of this our – Americas – Problem?

    As if you’d even fight us competently – which you do not and
    apparently cannot – if it was our interests.

    Some of us don’t define “our interests” as intellectuals playing
    game of thrones with others lives.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1264#respond)

9.  ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cb11f9dbf86ea5d5cd66180bc9315fc8?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    VXXC says:

    [December 18, 2013 at
    15:40](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1265)

    Ah ..and what I should have said first…Brilliant post, merry
    Christmas. It is Brilliant.

    ===========

    We should shoulder no more burdens. They cannot fight us competently
    if they wished, and they wish and are openly on both sides, all
    sides. Even when we are dying. This would be highly inadvisiable
    even from a ammoral point of view if it could be kept secret, and it
    isn’t. More incompetence. What happens when you think High Treason
    is a Birthright.

    No, I don’t mean Handle BTW. But he knows as well as I who and what
    we have served.

    Petreaus for instance was doomed the instant he pulled a victory
    over AQIZ out of the Hat by Bullshitting the Progs with his magic
    charts. They just waited.

    As noted above, they can’t run anything anymore. Let the Chinese and
    their neighbors sort it.\
     The only people we should protect with more blood are AU and NZ.
    Easily done.

    Time to say goodbye to Hegemony.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1265#respond)

10. Pingback: [Outside in - Involvements with reality » Blog Archive »
    Join the Dots](http://www.xenosystems.net/join-the-dots/)

11. Pingback: [Outside in - Involvements with reality » Blog Archive »
    Handling China](http://www.xenosystems.net/handling-china/)

12. ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/40bb48cc7e0e3c851d6ff0e691bf646e?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    Dan says:

    [December 21, 2013 at
    12:26](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1285)

    A huge and detailed post. The level of discourse is many notches
    higher in the reactosphere than among public ‘intellectuals.’ Sad.

    I wonder if it doesn’t matter in what order China plays its cards as
    far as the US is concerned. Our leadership and our country seems so
    determined to ignore reality in all areas that maybe China doesn’t
    need to worry about how it looks in the realm of reality. The China
    narrative is already written and the ‘work’ of policymakers is just
    to copy and paste what policies are already there.

    The adverse selection problem for Obamacare could have been
    understood by a middle schooler. The fact that the Arab ‘spring’
    from Libya to Egypt to Syria is a largely movement of Islamist
    radicals was obvious. That gender is written into a person’s DNA is
    elementary science. That American demographics are shifting in a way
    that ruins our leaders’ beloved tax foundation (among other things)
    is plain. Guess what — our leadership cares not one iota what
    reality is, per se. Would such a leadership be willing to (a)
    carefully analyze what China is doing, and (b) take proactive steps
    that bring no immediate political benefit and perhaps some political
    cost?

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1285#respond)

    -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) says:

        [December 21, 2013 at
        14:04](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1286)

        ‘Would such a leadership be willing to (a) carefully analyze
        what China is doing, and (b) take proactive steps that bring no
        immediate political benefit and perhaps some political cost?’

        We don’t have those kinds of wise and selfless statesmen and we
        can’t – democracy weeds them out of the process. Milton Friedman
        said that the role of public intellectuals in a democracy was to
        make it easier for politicians to do the necessary thing – that
        is – try and mold and influence public perceptions such that
        there is a political gain instead of a cost.

        But also, it’s tough for Presidents to go against the
        deeply-ingrained cultures and ideologies of the Departments.
        They have many ways of resisting White House directives that
        they don’t want to implement. Presidents avoid doing this at all
        costs to avoid upsetting relationships, even though the
        diversity of opinion as to what constitutes ‘the national
        interest’ necessarily implies the agencies are working at
        cross-purposes. The Departments are also full of subject matter
        experts and deep industry/academic relationships, and to the
        extent one is reliant on the best advice from the field, one has
        a hard time taking a bold stand against their guidance.

        These are the issues that Luttwak is trying to address. He
        thinks the U.S. should be organizing a coalition to choke off
        China’s growth via economic means. To do this, he has to 1. Make
        anti-China thinking more popular (not resulting in electoral
        defeat), and 2. Strengthen a President’s will to confront the
        ruinous free-trade-dogmatism of the Treasury (and the financial
        sector which owns it).

        Think about this rent-seeking mechanism. If you are a big
        investment bank, it would really be useful for you if you could
        acquire control over the U.S. Treasury by three means. 1.
        Hanging the prospect of extremely lucrative employment over the
        heads of government employees. 2. Enabling the ‘revolving door’
        hiring practices within those departments so that they hire
        ‘temporary public servants’ from within financial industry who
        expect to go back (and have to answer to the CEO for what they
        did while ‘in office’), and most subtly of all 3. Indoctrinating
        all those people, and especially the politically appointed
        chiefs, into the ideology of free trade.

        Now, as an aside, I am in general a proponent of free markets
        and favor a presumption against regulation and for *laissez
        faire*, in the *domestic* context. A presumption, however, is
        rebbutable, and not a crazy religious dogma that can never be
        balanced against equally legitimate concerns. And I also favor
        the presumption of *fair, balanced, and secure* free trade, but
        the nature of the international context and issues of
        geopolitics greatly diminishes the valence of that bias.

        Currently, the nature of the U.S. trade relationship with China
        is ‘unfair’ (via manipulated currency) leading to it being
        unbalanced (the trade surplus), and it is profoundly insecure
        (because they are buying away, or outright stealing, the
        intellectual property (of corporations and the military), which
        constitutes the basis of the national competitive advantage in
        both the civilian economy and national security.

        This means that is is pretty clearly *not* in the national
        interest to passively allow this to go on, and it borders on
        betrayal to actively attempt to accelerate the process on
        purpose.

        But, if a company has investments in China, then helping China
        grow and steal means your investments will have a higher rate of
        return. The more you can get Treasury to get USG to help China,
        then the better your Chinese investments will perform. Again,
        like Lenin said, “The Capitalists will sell us the rope with
        which we will hang them.” This is especially true if *some* of
        the capitalists think they are only selling out their *other*
        compatriots, and that they’ll do fine when the hangman comes
        round. Pure folly.

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1286#respond)

13. ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/36f6ea70a60e214a094680e6189fdfc1?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    Sam says:

    [December 22, 2013 at
    07:10](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1288)

    Thank you for writing this post.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1288#respond)

14. ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/378e25c94000af5f350fde986a8bf418?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    guest says:

    [December 24, 2013 at
    18:47](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-1293)

    I would also recommend the following video interview with Luttwak
    himself!

    Conversations with History, The Rise of China vs. the Logic of
    Strategy\

    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WejSKbicS00](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WejSKbicS00)

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=1293#respond)

15. ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f9b1fe453e7fe07ad4f235ade3dfdc39?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    Daniel says:

    [March 1, 2014 at
    19:08](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3156)

    Very interesting post, I ran into this on ycombinator news and after
    trying to skim your conclusion ended up reading the whole thing.

    Except for whichever part you forgot to include after:

    “It also helps if your people tend to be Market Dominant Minorities
    when they’re outnumbered, especially when”

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3156#respond)

    -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) says:

        [March 1, 2014 at
        20:49](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3157)

        Thanks for the head’s up. Hmmm … what was I intending all those
        11 weeks ago… ?

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3157#respond)

16. ![image](https://i0.wp.com/lh4.googleusercontent.com/-MT6HQyo5k1g/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAOSs/3DGbQ9z9wKI/photo.jpg?resize=40%2C40)
    [Paolo Marino](https://plus.google.com/108610835216159341229) says:

    [March 2, 2014 at
    00:20](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3160)

    Just a little nitpick: you wrote “Cout d’Etat: A Practical Handbook”
    – it should be “Coup d’Etat”…

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3160#respond)

    -   ![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
        [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) says:

        [March 2, 2014 at
        00:43](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3161)

        Thanks! And fixed.

        [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3161#respond)

17. ![image](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/bedae0d195d7061f08bb81e466d37060?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    Howard says:

    [March 2, 2014 at
    07:19](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3164)

    The problem is that Luttwak is assuming that the guns will be used.
    In the age of nuclear weapons, it is not unreasonable to assume that
    expensive weapons systems will never be used.

    In that case, it is a reasonable to spend some money on guns so all
    your potential enemies will spend MORE money on guns. They will have
    less money on butter. The strategy of spending all your money on
    butter will be a loser if your competitors are growing faster.

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3164#respond)

18. ![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f815b6d8a03e899c0807da5830fc13c3?s=40&d=identicon&r=PG)
    [duggi](http://gravatar.com/douglee98) says:

    [March 2, 2014 at
    07:49](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3165)

    i’m sorry – when you write at this length and appeal to points this
    detailed and highbrow; you simply cannot misspell (typo?)
    “agrandizement” (sic)

    [Reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/?replytocom=3165#respond)

### Comment - You know you want to [Cancel reply](/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#respond)

Enter your comment here...

Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:

-   [](#comment-form-guest "Guest")
-   [](#comment-form-load-service:WordPress.com "WordPress.com")
-   [](#comment-form-load-service:Twitter "Twitter")
-   [](#comment-form-load-service:Facebook "Facebook")
-   

[![Gravatar](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=PG)](https://gravatar.com/site/signup/)

Email (required) (Address never made public)

Name (required)

Website

![WordPress.com
Logo](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/mu-plugins/highlander-comments/images/wplogo.png)

**** You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout(%20'wordpress'%20);)
/ [Change](#) )

![Twitter
picture](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=PG)

**** You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout(%20'twitter'%20);) /
[Change](#) )

![Facebook
photo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=PG)

**** You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout(%20'facebook'%20);)
/ [Change](#) )

![Google+
photo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=PG)

**** You are commenting using your Google+ account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout(%20'googleplus'%20);)
/ [Change](#) )

[Cancel](javascript:HighlanderComments.cancelExternalWindow();)

Connecting to %s

Notify me of follow-up comments via email.

Notify me of new posts via email.

-   Search for:
-   ### Recent Posts

    -   [Is, Ought, And The
        Elephant](http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2014/02/18/is-ought-and-the-elephant/)
    -   [Can You Handle
        It?](http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2014/02/16/can-you-handle-it/)
    -   [Adam Gurri Is A
        Mensch](http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2014/02/14/adam-gurri-is-a-mensch/)
    -   [The Atheist
        Evangelist](http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2014/02/10/the-atheist-evangelist/)
    -   [Anti-Sabbatical](http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2014/01/27/anti-sabbatical/)

-   ### Recent Comments

      ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      [![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=48&d=identicon&r=PG)](http://handleshaus.com)              [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) on [Review of “The Rise of C…](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3167)
      [![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/600af3bc312c80e196f608fb6093d0a9?s=48&d=identicon&r=PG)](http://richardkulisz.blogspot.com)   [Richard](http://richardkulisz.blogspot.com) on [Review of “The Rise of C…](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3166)
      [![image](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f815b6d8a03e899c0807da5830fc13c3?s=48&d=identicon&r=PG)](http://gravatar.com/douglee98)       [duggi](http://gravatar.com/douglee98) on [Review of “The Rise of C…](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3165)
      ![image](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/bedae0d195d7061f08bb81e466d37060?s=48&d=identicon&r=PG)                                        Howard on [Review of “The Rise of C…](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3164)
      [![image](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d283eb49acb318be2fdb4c0c3aeb522d?s=48&d=identicon&r=PG)](http://handleshaus.com)              [Handle](http://handleshaus.com) on [Review of “The Rise of C…](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/#comment-3161)
      ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   ### Archives

    -   [February 2014](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2014/02/)
    -   [January 2014](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2014/01/)
    -   [December 2013](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/)
    -   [November 2013](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/11/)
    -   [October 2013](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/10/)
    -   [September 2013](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/09/)
    -   [August 2013](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/08/)
    -   [May 2013](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/05/)

-   ### Categories

    -   [Uncategorized](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/ "View all posts filed under Uncategorized")

-   ### Meta

    -   [Register](https://wordpress.com/signup/?ref=wplogin)
    -   [Log in](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/wp-login.php)
    -   [Entries
        RSS](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/feed/ "Syndicate this site using RSS 2.0")
    -   [Comments
        RSS](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/comments/feed/ "The latest comments to all posts in RSS")
    -   [WordPress.com](http://wordpress.com/ "Powered by WordPress, state-of-the-art semantic personal publishing platform.")

[Handle's Haus](https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/ "Handle's Haus")

[The Twenty Ten
Theme](http://theme.wordpress.com/themes/twentyten/ "Learn more about this theme")
[Blog at WordPress.com](http://wordpress.com/?ref=footer).

[Follow](javascript:void(0))

### Follow “Handle's Haus”

Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.

Join 32 other followers

[Powered by WordPress.com](http://wordpress.com/signup/?ref=lof)

%d bloggers like this:

![image](https://stats.wordpress.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/12/17/review-of-the-rise-of-china-vs-the-logic-of-strategy-by-edward-luttwak/
