< [the computers are winning](/)

Transducers are fundamental
===========================

by [Ignacio Thayer](/)

##### Clojure's Transducers are as fundamental as function composition

[Transducers](http://blog.cognitect.com/blog/2014/8/6/transducers-are-coming)
are being introduced in the next version of clojure. There are a few
posts about them already, but I found the notion of transducers more
elegant and natural than I have seen described. They simplify a lot of
disparate clojure concepts and make it easier to write more performant
code without any loss in generality. They are quite beautiful, actually,
and I believe the concept is elemental, like function composition.

\

Definition
----------

From the announcement: a transducer is *a function that takes one
reducing function and returns another*. That's very general and totally
relies on understanding a reducing function. A reducing function is a
function that has the structure of what you'd pass to **reduce**. It is
a function which accepts an element of input and a previous reduction,
and returns a new reduction.

By Example
----------

Making it more concrete by way of example, let's start with a simple
reducing function:

This reducing function reduces a sequences of numbers into a map
containing the count and sum of the numbers.

Now that we have a reducing function, let's *transduce* it, using only
what we know so far. Again, per the definition, this means we'll need to
return a function that's a reducing function (one that accepts the
previous reduction and a new element, and returns the next reduction).
Let's try to make a transducer that will cause our mean-reducer to
increment all of the inputs.

We've just implemented a crude transducer, and all it can do is
increment.

Core Functions
--------------

One of the parts of the announcement of transducers was that clojure's
core functions (map, filter, take, etc) that normally operate on
sequences will gain a new arity that returns a transducer when called
with a single argument that's a function. The new code for the 1-arity
*map* looks much like what we already wrote (ignore the other arities
for now).

Now we can see in fact how crude our original transducer is, it can be
constructed trivially with *map*.

Neat, but if you stop and think for a minute, the above returns the same
result as the non-transducers form:

Here, map is operating on a sequence like it did before. Now we know
what transducers are, but haven't quite had the epiphany yet. So why is
the transducer form different and more importantly, better?

This is the right question to ask! And will lead to understanding the
elegance of transducers. Don't proceed until you convince yourself that
the previous two examples generate the same result.

Decoupling From Sequences
-------------------------

When using the thrush, or *-\>\>*, form above, *map* accepts an input
sequence one by one, and runs *inc* over each of the elements,
generating a new sequence, which is then reduced by *reduce*. **This
creation of logic via composition of sequence-iterating functions
complects the created logic with the machinery of sequences.** This also
means that unnecessary intermediate sequences are created just to
execute your logic.

If we could separate our logic from sequences, we could write more
performant code by avoiding incidental sequences. We could also use the
same logic across things that aren't necessarily sequences (eg:
clojure.core/reducers, channels).

Transducers let us do that by composing functions "inside" the traversal
of the input, instead of composing sequence-traversing functions
"outside" on the sequences themselves.

They are similar to traditional function composition (eg: *comp*) in
this way, but a *comp*ed function iterated over a sequence can only know
about a single element at a time, and doesn't have state. Transducers
can encapsulate state (eg: the *take* transducer uses an atom to count
elements), and can control generation of output (eg: the *filter*
transducer can decide whether or not to pass a token to the passed-in
reducing function, whereas a composed function that's *map*ped needs to
generate one output per input).

Using Transducers
-----------------

We've seen how you can create a transducer, and the advantages they
have, but how do you use them? Above we used our crude transducer and
our **(map inc)** transducer with *reduce*, but because they no longer
require sequences, they can be used in other ways. Here are some
examples.

Finally, transducers can of course be composed, allowing the building up
of logic without requiring them to be used with sequences.

Now go read the [release
announcement](http://blog.cognitect.com/blog/2014/8/6/transducers-are-coming).

* * * * *

Discuss this on [hacker
news](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=8246706).

[Tweet](http://twitter.com/share)

* * * * *

[‚Üê
Previous](/post/Hosting-Clojure-Dependencies-on-S3 "Hosting Clojure Dependencies on S3")

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://thecomputersarewinning.com/post/Transducers-Are-Fundamental/
