[Salon](/)
==========

![image](/content/themes/salon/css/images/header-ie8.png)

[](/)

-   [Home](/)
-   [News](http://www.salon.com/category/news/)
    -   news
        ----

        -   [Education](http://www.salon.com/topic/education/)
        -   [Labor](http://www.salon.com/topic/labor/)
        -   [Health Care](http://www.salon.com/topic/health_care_2/)
        -   [Reproductive
            Rights](http://www.salon.com/topic/reproductive_rights/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/cnn_anchors_ferguson_idea_why_not_use_water_cannons_on_the_protestors/ "CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on the protesters?")
            [CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on
            the
            protesters?](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/cnn_anchors_ferguson_idea_why_not_use_water_cannons_on_the_protestors/ "CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on the protesters?")
            [Ian Blair](http://www.salon.com/writer/ian_blair/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/more_horrific_details_emerge_in_christy_mack_assault_case/ "More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault case")
            [More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault
            case](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/more_horrific_details_emerge_in_christy_mack_assault_case/ "More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault case")
            [Jenny Kutner](http://www.salon.com/writer/jenny_kutner/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/journalist_james_wright_foley_reportedly_beheaded_by_isis/ "Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by ISIS ")
            [Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by
            ISIS](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/journalist_james_wright_foley_reportedly_beheaded_by_isis/ "Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by ISIS ")
            [Joanna
            Rothkopf](http://www.salon.com/writer/joanna_rothkopf/)

-   [Politics](http://www.salon.com/category/politics/)
    -   politics
        --------

        -   [2014 elections](http://www.salon.com/topic/2014_elections/)
        -   [Obamacare](http://www.salon.com/topic/obamacare/)
        -   [The Right](http://www.salon.com/topic/the_right/)
        -   [2016 Elections](http://www.salon.com/topic/2016_elections/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/cnn_anchors_ferguson_idea_why_not_use_water_cannons_on_the_protestors/ "CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on the protesters?")
            [CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on
            the
            protesters?](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/cnn_anchors_ferguson_idea_why_not_use_water_cannons_on_the_protestors/ "CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on the protesters?")
            [Ian Blair](http://www.salon.com/writer/ian_blair/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/journalist_james_wright_foley_reportedly_beheaded_by_isis/ "Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by ISIS ")
            [Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by
            ISIS](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/journalist_james_wright_foley_reportedly_beheaded_by_isis/ "Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by ISIS ")
            [Joanna
            Rothkopf](http://www.salon.com/writer/joanna_rothkopf/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/my_heartbreaking_walmart_story_how_working_there_devastated_my_family/ "My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my family")
            [My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there
            devastated my
            family](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/my_heartbreaking_walmart_story_how_working_there_devastated_my_family/ "My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my family")
            [Linda Haluska](http://www.salon.com/writer/linda_haluska/)

-   [Entertainment](http://www.salon.com/category/entertainment/)
    -   entertainment
        -------------

        -   [Books](http://www.salon.com/topic/books/)
        -   [Movies](http://www.salon.com/topic/movies/)
        -   [Music](http://www.salon.com/topic/music/)
        -   [TV](http://www.salon.com/topic/tv/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/i_was_going_to_gay_bars_having_affairs_george_takei_on_the_torments_of_life_in_the_closet/ ""I was going to gay bars, having affairs": George Takei on the torments of life in the closet")
            ["I was going to gay bars, having affairs": George Takei on
            the torments of life in the
            closet](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/i_was_going_to_gay_bars_having_affairs_george_takei_on_the_torments_of_life_in_the_closet/ ""I was going to gay bars, having affairs": George Takei on the torments of life in the closet")
            [Daniel
            D'Addario](http://www.salon.com/writer/daniel_daddario/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/14/john_oliver_wont_be_your_therapist_how_he_torpedoed_the_reassuring_tropes_of_fake_news/ "John Oliver won't be your therapist: How he torpedoed the reassuring tropes of fake news")
            [John Oliver won't be your therapist: How he torpedoed the
            reassuring tropes of fake
            news](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/14/john_oliver_wont_be_your_therapist_how_he_torpedoed_the_reassuring_tropes_of_fake_news/ "John Oliver won't be your therapist: How he torpedoed the reassuring tropes of fake news")
            [Steve Almond](http://www.salon.com/writer/steve_almond/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/must_see_morning_clip_david_letterman_delivers_moving_tribute_to_robin_williams_his_friend_of_38_years/ "Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38 years")
            [Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving
            tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38
            years](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/must_see_morning_clip_david_letterman_delivers_moving_tribute_to_robin_williams_his_friend_of_38_years/ "Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38 years")
            [Sarah Gray](http://www.salon.com/writer/sarah_gray/)

-   [Life](http://www.salon.com/category/life/)
    -   life
        ----

        -   [Life Stories](http://www.salon.com/topic/life_stories/)
        -   [Love & Sex](http://www.salon.com/topic/love_and_sex/)
        -   [Parenting](http://www.salon.com/topic/parenting/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/the_truth_about_the_ice_bucket_challenge/ "The truth about the "Ice Bucket Challenge"")
            [The truth about the "Ice Bucket
            Challenge"](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/the_truth_about_the_ice_bucket_challenge/ "The truth about the "Ice Bucket Challenge"")
            [Sarah Gray](http://www.salon.com/writer/sarah_gray/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/more_horrific_details_emerge_in_christy_mack_assault_case/ "More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault case")
            [More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault
            case](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/more_horrific_details_emerge_in_christy_mack_assault_case/ "More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault case")
            [Jenny Kutner](http://www.salon.com/writer/jenny_kutner/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/must_see_morning_clip_david_letterman_delivers_moving_tribute_to_robin_williams_his_friend_of_38_years/ "Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38 years")
            [Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving
            tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38
            years](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/must_see_morning_clip_david_letterman_delivers_moving_tribute_to_robin_williams_his_friend_of_38_years/ "Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38 years")
            [Sarah Gray](http://www.salon.com/writer/sarah_gray/)

-   [Tech](http://www.salon.com/category/technology/)
    -   tech
        ----

        -   [Privacy](http://www.salon.com/topic/privacy/)
        -   [Social Media](http://www.salon.com/topic/social_media/)
        -   [Gadgets](http://www.salon.com/topic/gadgets/)
        -   [Drones](http://www.salon.com/topic/drones/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/we_might_all_be_having_sex_with_robots_soon/ "We might all be having sex with robots soon")
            [We might all be having sex with robots
            soon](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/we_might_all_be_having_sex_with_robots_soon/ "We might all be having sex with robots soon")
            [Ej Dickson](http://www.salon.com/writer/ej_dickson/), The
            Daily Dot
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/17/war_and_peace_tortured_me_facebook_email_and_the_neuroscience_of_always_being_distracted/ ""War and Peace" tortured me: Facebook, email and the neuroscience of always being distracted")
            ["War and Peace" tortured me: Facebook, email and the
            neuroscience of always being
            distracted](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/17/war_and_peace_tortured_me_facebook_email_and_the_neuroscience_of_always_being_distracted/ ""War and Peace" tortured me: Facebook, email and the neuroscience of always being distracted")
            [Michael
            Harris](http://www.salon.com/writer/michael_harris/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/how_air_conditioning_remade_modern_america/ "How air conditioning remade modern America")
            [How air conditioning remade modern
            America](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/how_air_conditioning_remade_modern_america/ "How air conditioning remade modern America")
            [Henry Grabar](http://www.salon.com/writer/henry_grabar/)

-   [Business](http://www.salon.com/category/business/)
    -   business
        --------

        -   [Wall Street](http://www.salon.com/topic/wall_street/)
        -   [Finance](http://www.salon.com/topic/finance/)
        -   [Labor](http://www.salon.com/topic/labor/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/big_oil_has_been_illegally_using_diesel_fuel_and_lying_about_it/ "Big oil has been illegally using diesel fuel and lying about it")
            [Big oil has been illegally using diesel fuel and lying
            about
            it](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/big_oil_has_been_illegally_using_diesel_fuel_and_lying_about_it/ "Big oil has been illegally using diesel fuel and lying about it")
            [Naveena
            Sadasivam](http://www.salon.com/writer/naveena_sadasivam/),
            ProPublica
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/brace_yourself_for_the_nutella_shortage/ "Brace yourself for the Nutella shortage")
            [Brace yourself for the Nutella
            shortage](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/brace_yourself_for_the_nutella_shortage/ "Brace yourself for the Nutella shortage")
            [Lindsay
            Abrams](http://www.salon.com/writer/lindsay_abrams/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/my_heartbreaking_walmart_story_how_working_there_devastated_my_family/ "My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my family")
            [My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there
            devastated my
            family](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/my_heartbreaking_walmart_story_how_working_there_devastated_my_family/ "My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my family")
            [Linda Haluska](http://www.salon.com/writer/linda_haluska/)

-   [Sustainability](http://www.salon.com/category/sustainability/)
    -   sustainability
        --------------

        -   [Climate Change](http://www.salon.com/topic/climate_change/)
        -   [Dream City](http://www.salon.com/topic/dream_city/)
        -   [organic food](http://www.salon.com/topic/organic_food/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/17/i_can%e2%80%99t_put_aside_the_things_that_i%e2%80%99ve_witnessed_meet_the_star_of_netflixs_powerful_new_documentary/ ""I can’t put aside the things that I’ve witnessed": Meet the star of Netflix's powerful new documentary")
            ["I can’t put aside the things that I’ve witnessed": Meet
            the star of Netflix's powerful new
            documentary](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/17/i_can%e2%80%99t_put_aside_the_things_that_i%e2%80%99ve_witnessed_meet_the_star_of_netflixs_powerful_new_documentary/ ""I can’t put aside the things that I’ve witnessed": Meet the star of Netflix's powerful new documentary")
            [Lindsay
            Abrams](http://www.salon.com/writer/lindsay_abrams/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/it_costs_nearly_250000_to_raise_an_american_child/ "It costs nearly $250,000 to raise an American child")
            [It costs nearly $250,000 to raise an American
            child](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/it_costs_nearly_250000_to_raise_an_american_child/ "It costs nearly $250,000 to raise an American child")
            [Jenny Kutner](http://www.salon.com/writer/jenny_kutner/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/brace_yourself_for_the_nutella_shortage/ "Brace yourself for the Nutella shortage")
            [Brace yourself for the Nutella
            shortage](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/brace_yourself_for_the_nutella_shortage/ "Brace yourself for the Nutella shortage")
            [Lindsay
            Abrams](http://www.salon.com/writer/lindsay_abrams/)

-   [Innovation](http://www.salon.com/category/innovation/)
    -   innovation
        ----------

        -   [Science](http://www.salon.com/topic/science/)
        -   [ideas](http://www.salon.com/topic/ideas/)
        -   [Silicon Valley](http://www.salon.com/topic/silicon_valley/)
        -   [cool culture](http://www.salon.com/topic/cool_culture/)

        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/17/lets_make_suburbs_into_cities_new_urbanism_car_culture_and_the_future_of_community/ "Let's make suburbs into cities: New urbanism, car culture and the future of community")
            [Let's make suburbs into cities: New urbanism, car culture
            and the future of
            community](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/17/lets_make_suburbs_into_cities_new_urbanism_car_culture_and_the_future_of_community/ "Let's make suburbs into cities: New urbanism, car culture and the future of community")
            [Steven Conn](http://www.salon.com/writer/steven_conn/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/how_air_conditioning_remade_modern_america/ "How air conditioning remade modern America")
            [How air conditioning remade modern
            America](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/how_air_conditioning_remade_modern_america/ "How air conditioning remade modern America")
            [Henry Grabar](http://www.salon.com/writer/henry_grabar/)
        -   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/the_truth_about_the_ice_bucket_challenge/ "The truth about the "Ice Bucket Challenge"")
            [The truth about the "Ice Bucket
            Challenge"](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/the_truth_about_the_ice_bucket_challenge/ "The truth about the "Ice Bucket Challenge"")
            [Sarah Gray](http://www.salon.com/writer/sarah_gray/)

-   -   [Salon on Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/salon)
-   [Salon on Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/salon)
-   -   [](http://www.facebook.com/salon)
    -   [](http://www.twitter.com/salon)

-   

    [Log out](#) [Sign in](#)

Sunday, Jun 8, 2014 11:00 AM UTC

Colleges are full of it: Behind the three-decade scheme to raise tuition, bankrupt generations, and hypnotize the media
=======================================================================================================================

Tuition is up 1,200 percent in 30 years. Here's why you're unemployed, crushed by debt -- and no one is helping
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Thomas Frank](http://www.salon.com/writer/thomas_frank/)

-   [Share](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/)
-   [](whatsapp://send?text=Take%20a%20look%20at%20this%20awesome%20article:)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/)
-   [0](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/#comments)
-   -   ### All Share Services

-   [](#)

Topics: [College](/topic/college), [millennials](/topic/millennials),
[student loans](/topic/student_loans), [Debt](/topic/debt), [William
Bennett](/topic/william_bennett), [Barack Obama](/topic/barack_obama),
[Editor's Picks](/topic/editors_picks), [Tom Frank](/topic/tom_frank),
[aol\_on](/topic/aol_on), [Business
News](http://www.salon.com/category/business/),
[News](http://www.salon.com/category/news/)

[](http://media.salon.com/2014/06/back_to_school.jpg "Colleges are full of it: Behind the three-decade scheme to raise tuition, bankrupt generations, and hypnotize the media ")![Colleges
are full of it: Behind the three-decade scheme to raise tuition,
bankrupt generations, and hypnotize the media
](http://media.salon.com/2014/06/back_to_school-620x412.jpg "Colleges are full of it: Behind the three-decade scheme to raise tuition, bankrupt generations, and hypnotize the media ")Rodney
Dangerfield in "Back to School"

The price of a year at college has increased by more than
[1,200](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-08-15/cost-of-college-degree-in-u-s-soars-12-fold-chart-of-the-day.html)
percent over the last 30 years, far outpacing any other price the
government tracks: food, housing, cars, gasoline, TVs, you name it.
Tuition has increased at a rate double that of medical care, usually
considered the most expensive of human necessities. It has outstripped
any reasonable expectation people might have had for investments over
the period. And, as we all know, it has crushed a generation of college
grads with debt. Today, thanks to those enormous tuition prices, young
Americans routinely start adult life with a burden unknown to any
previous cohort and whose ruinous effects we can only guess at.

On the assumption that anyone in that generation still has a taste for
irony, I offer the following quotation on the subject, drawn from one of
the earliest news stories about the problem of soaring tuition. The
newspaper was the Washington Post; the speaker was an assistant dean at
a college that had just announced a tuition hike of 19 percent; and the
question before him was how much farther tuition increases could go.
“Maybe all of a sudden this bubble is going to burst,” he was quoted as
saying. “How much will the public take?”

Oh, we would take quite a lot, as it happened. It was 1981 when the
assistant dean worried in that manner—the very first year of what was
once called the “tuition spiral,” when higher ed prices got the
attention of the media by outpacing inflation by a factor of two or
three. There was something shocking about this development; tuition
hadn’t gone up like that during the 1970s, even though that was the
heyday of ascending consumer prices.

Yet at that point, the tuition spiral had more than three *decades* to
go—indeed, it is still twisting upward today. But the way we talk about
this slow-motion disaster has changed little over the years. Ever since
the spiral began, commentators have been marveling at how far it’s gone
and wondering how much farther it has yet to run—“the trend can’t
continue,” they say every few years. They ask when the families and
politicians of America are finally going to get off their knees and do
something about it.

* * * * *

* * * * *

But somehow nothing ever gets done. The trend does continue. And for 30
years the journalists who cover the subject have followed the same
pointless script. They have hunted fruitlessly for the legitimate
expense that they knew must be driving up the prices. They have chased
repeatedly after the wrong answers, blaming everybody and everything
except for the obvious culprits. They have related to us the
politicians’ plans for bringing the spiral to a stop—plans that everyone
can see have virtually no chance of succeeding.

And all along, the larger meaning of the spiral is almost never
discussed, as though it were contrary to some unwritten rule of
journalistic cognition.

\*

Reading back over journalistic accounts of the tuition spiral from the
’80s and ’90s, you get the impression that all concerned felt it was a
wee bit uncouth to dig too deeply into a university’s pricing practices
or suspect the sachems of higher learning who presided over them of
anything inappropriate. These were the journalists’s beloved alma
maters, after all: surely they had our best interests at heart. Surely
we could trust the word of university administrators, even though they
always—in their determination to make tuition price increases seem
rational and sensible—seemed to find a way to blame someone other than
themselves.

And so, beginning in the ’80s, university administrators, their words
dutifully transcribed by journalists, blamed utility bills for soaring
tuition. They blamed libraries, which made a certain amount of sense
until libraries went dramatically out of fashion in the Internet age—and
yet still tuition prices went up.

They blamed professors, of course, since professors are the most visible
part of a university and because it’s easy to hate professors. Sometimes
university spokesmen would claim that colleges were being forced to
spend a lot in order to hire the very best professors, an academic echo
of the reasoning corporate America uses to explain fat executive
salaries. On other occasions, however, they would claim that they were
being forced to spend a lot because professors nowadays were lazy and
didn’t want to teach and so they were forced to hire an expanded roster
of them to offer all their courses. Both excuses were plausible on
paper, and there’s probably some university president somewhere who’s
still blaming professors for his insane tuition bills. But these alibis
only made sense until the outside world figured out that universities
were actually using graduate students and adjuncts to teach their
courses and yet *still* tuition prices were mounting at an insane clip.

Administrators also blamed tuition inflation on onerous government
regulations, which (they said) forced them to hire bureaucrats to fill
out forms; sometimes they did this even when they themselves had lobbied
for the government regulation in question. They blamed students, who
were supposedly demanding all manner of luxuries and would not be
denied. “Students today want carpeting, they want furniture, they want
voice mail,” an administrator at a Nevada university told USA Today for
a 1997 story about the tuition spiral. “They want all the amenities that
10, 20, 30 years ago were almost unheard of.” (One wonders if, by that
logic, students today “want” life-altering amounts of debt, too.)

And administrators blamed society, which was forcing them to be
high-tech and culturally diverse, social improvements that were supposed
to be terribly expensive. According to a tuition-spiral story that
appeared in The New York Times in 1988,

> “colleges say that tuition bills reflect the demands society places on
> them: to shelter students from drugs and alcohol, to diversify their
> campuses with more black, Hispanic and rural students, to provide
> access ramps and elevators for the handicapped, to prepare students
> for a high-technology society.”

In one of the most curious bits of blame-evasion, [a 1990
report](http://books.google.com/books/about/The_college_tuition_spiral.html?id=whSdAAAAMAAJ)
commissioned by the College Board actually attributed rising tuition
prices to a *declining* student population. Like all the other excuses,
this got university administrators off the hook, but it also raised
troubling questions. Ordinarily, reduced demand makes prices go down,
not up; that the opposite was happening implied that colleges had the
power simply to impose their costs on the student population regardless
of that population’s size or wishes. (Besides, when the student
population numbers reversed themselves and began to rise several years
later, tuition *still* ascended.) The same report went on to insist that
higher ed was an “extremely competitive” industry, but that it had
simply “chosen to compete in ways other than price.” They were building
really fine gymnasiums in lieu of keeping prices under control—six one
way, half dozen the other. This was supposed to be reassuring, but like
the stuff about reduced demand yielding higher prices, it should have
rung alarm bells all over Washington, clearly indicating that this
particular industry was not subject to basic market forces—that
regulation and maybe even price controls were immediately required.

The possibility that higher tuition prices were going to pay for rapidly
multiplying and yet educationally unnecessary administrators was not
really raised in earnest until a memorable page-one series published in
1996 by the Philadelphia Inquirer. This interpretation had the virtue of
being accurate: Unlike tenured faculty, university administrations
actually have grown by [369 percent since the
mid-1970s](http://www.aaup.org/sites/default/files/files/2014%20salary%20report/Figure%201.pdf).
([As I have noted
before.](http://www.salon.com/2014/05/18/congratulations_class_of_2014_youre_totally_screwed/))
But blaming administrators proved difficult for journalists, perhaps
because administrators were the very people journalists had been going
to for explanations in their tuition-outrage stories. Could their
sources actually be the culprits? No way. And so, less than a year after
the Inquirer’s series appeared, USA Today ran its own big tuition-shock
tale in which the blame was pinned on all the familiar blame-objects:
Professors, student demands, technology, gummint regulation. A 1997
cover story in Time magazine—“How Colleges Are Gouging U,” the
illustration shouted—barely mentioned administrators at all.

One factor remained constant through all these years of journalistic
hand-wringing: Those who wrote about the higher ed price problem kept
expecting the Invisible Hand to assert itself and straighten this thing
out. Every glimmer of light looked to them like the end of the tunnel:
An unusually small tuition increase at Stanford in 1990, for example,
was trumpeted on page one of the New York Times as evidence that market
forces had worked, that the spiral had ended. Others agreed. In February
of 1991, the Seattle Times announced that we had reached the end of the
ordeal: “The fact is, middle-class students and parents simply can’t pay
any more.” They were wrong, of course. Eight months later, USA Today
reported that tuition was spiking upward again, growing by 12 percent
that year at state universities. And it pains me to report that an
education at Stanford today costs about $60,000 per year, just a little
less than the most expensive schools of them all.

What were journalists to do after ringing the alarm bells for so many
years without effect? Well, there was one easy answer to this
frustrating situation: To discover that there wasn’t really any problem
in the first place. That the tuition spiral was entirely reasonable,
even if no one could actually explain it. How so? Well, if you examine
what has come to be called the “college wage premium”—the difference
between what is earned by college grads and high school grads—it becomes
clear that someone who finishes four years at a university will
eventually earn far more than they spent to go there, even at the crazy
tuition prices of recent decades. Today this is a [universal way of
considering the
situation](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/27/upshot/is-college-worth-it-clearly-new-data-say.html?_r=0),
always leading us to conclude that going to college is “worth it”; that
it is a “bargain”; that it “pays off.” But it only seemed to enter
journalists’ consciousness in the 1990s, as on the occasion when Gaston
Caperton, president of the College Board, explained matters thusly to
the Los Angeles Times in 1999:

> “He said there has been too much focus on the cost of college and too
> little on the lifetime returns for four years of investment. Because a
> college graduate today earns about twice as much as a worker with only
> a high school diploma, he said, ‘a college education is worth about $1
> million over a lifetime.’ ”

The mind reels when confronted with this kind of smugness. One wonders:
Is there some identifiable aspect of a college education that yields
that million dollar prize—exposure to advanced literary theory, for
example? Is there a way to isolate that particular 24-carat nugget and
leave the dross behind—all the plush dorm carpeting and the many layers
of assistant deans? My guess, though, is that Caperton’s statement meant
exactly the opposite of this—that there was no need to inquire any
further about the tuition outrage. What it implied, by extension, was
that since we now know the final value of a college degree (*one million
dollars!*), the colleges can simply keep raising tuition prices and
student indebtedness until they have extracted that amount from their
graduates—and only after they have hit that figure will we have cause to
complain.

\*

Government has been little better than journalists. Over the three
decades of the tuition spiral, by far the most forthright antagonist of
the inflation-happy colleges was the Reagan-era culture
warrior/education secretary William Bennett, who seemed to delight in
blunt statements like this one: “Some of our colleges and universities
charge what the market will bear. . . . The heart of the matter is that
colleges raise costs because they can.” Were some member of the
compromise-minded Obama team to talk like that today the centrist earth
below Washington DC would gape in outrage and swallow them up.

Unfortunately, angry rhetoric is as far as Bennett went. The solutions
he proposed, like all the solutions anyone has proposed over the three
decades of the tuition spiral, did the opposite of help. Bennett
believed that federal grants fed the tuition spiral; replacing them with
loans and restricting the annual increase was supposed to solve the
problem. The basic idea here was that if we exposed students more
directly to the educational market that Bennett had identified—making
them borrow the money to attend—we could then count on those
self-interested economic actors to behave as consumers are supposed to
and do something about the problem. The policy was “to re-emphasize
self-help,” per the New York Times. But this particular market has never
worked that way, and the only effect, of course, was to raise up the
Himalayas of student debt that are such a familiar part of the landscape
today.

The hunt for a market-based solution went on, however. During the
presidency of George H. W. Bush, the Department of Justice accused the
Ivy League universities of acting as a “collegiate cartel” and
conspiring to fix financial aid and hence prices. The antitrust case was
settled with a consent decree in 1991; the tuition spiral proceeded as
before. (I have written about this
[elsewhere](http://www.tcfrank.com/essays/The_Price_of_Admission), in
case you’re interested.)

And that was pretty much it—the very last time the federal government
tried to get tough with the higher ed industry. Since then, the two
parties have gone their different ways on the matter—Democrats today
worship education, while Republicans today worship the market, neither
of which faith has brought us close to a solution. The efforts of the
Clinton administration, for example, were almost unbelievably feeble:
With great fanfare, the Democrats streamlined the student loan process,
proposed a tax cut for parents who paid for college, and—hooray—cracked
down on student borrowers. (“We have tracked down defaulters and made
them pay,” Bill Clinton boasted in 1997.)

A low point of sorts was reached in the late 1990s, when Congress
appointed a “National Commission on the Cost of Higher Education,” and
filled it with university presidents and the head of one of the main
higher-ed lobby groups. The
[report](http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED416762)they proceeded to publish in
1998 was an entirely predictable outcome of this staffing decision, I
suppose, but still the reader is struck by its resounding impotence.
This panel was so pallid it didn’t even amount to a whitewash. On page
one of its report, for example, the Commission declared that it wasn’t
really interested in soaring tuition at all, except insofar as soaring
tuitions might cause Americans to feel “ill will” toward universities.
After going on to catalog the usual culprits—blame regulations, blame
students—the Commission concluded that there should be—yes!—*further
study* on the matter. (“The Commission recommends that the philanthropic
community, research institutes, and agencies of state and local
government adopt the topic of academic cost control as a research area
worthy of major financial support.”) They also recommended that
universities do a better PR job, that they organize themselves to
“inform the public” about “the returns on this investment.”

But even that would probably be considered an outrage were it published
today. Last year, the Obama administration announced its own [“Plan to
Make College More
Affordable”](http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/08/22/fact-sheet-president-s-plan-make-college-more-affordable-better-bargain-);
the centerpiece was a scheme for doing something analogous to what that
Commission proposed back in 1998: building a rating system to inform the
public about the returns on college investments. (There was also the
obligatory olive branch to the right, in a proposal to “reduce
regulatory barriers.”)

The universities responded by going [absolutely
apeshit](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/26/us/colleges-rattled-as-obama-presses-rating-system.html).
They are happy to talk about the “return on investment” when it’s a
vague promise of a million bucks for anyone who pays up and goes to
college; when someone actually takes them at their word and tries to
measure the claim, it seems that fundamental principles are being
trampled.

I hope Obama ignores the wailing of the universities and goes through
with his plan, despite the [obvious
folly](http://www.geoffshullenberger.com/archives/304)of trying to
explain people’s relative prosperity by reference to the college they
attended instead of their class background. If the president were to
expand his approach to include data on the vast and growing size of
university administrations and how many courses are taught at each
college by adjuncts, his rating system might well be useful.

But there should be no illusions. More information by itself is not
going to stop the tuition spiral, not after 33 years. In fact, we can
predict fairly easily how this thing will backfire once the government
discovers and announces the precise “return on investment” for each
institution of higher learning: Like any rational, profit-maximizing
entity those institutions will simply continue hiking tuitions in order
to capture a larger chunk of that return for themselves.

As the reforms fail and the journalism fails maybe we will figure out
that all along there has been a single bad ideological idea behind all
of this failure: The notion that the market will solve the problem if we
only adjust the controls a little. And as the newspapers of 2020 tell us
about an angry new generation of students shouldering an unimaginable
debt burden, maybe it will dawn on Barack Obama, by then retired and
relaxing on the beach in Hawaii, that maybe we shouldn’t have thought of
education as a market in the first place. Maybe college shouldn’t be
about individuals getting rich. Maybe there is another purpose.

\*

In the long sweep of journalistic commentary on the tuition spiral,
relatively few have raised that question. One occasion when it cropped
up was in 1986, when the shift from grants to loans was under way, and a
spokesman for a higher-ed accreditation group was able to grasp the
larger meaning of the change. “A grant conveys the message, ‘We value
you and will invest in your future,’ ” he told the New York Times. “The
message of a loan is, ‘Go forward if you want, but on your own nickel.’
Loans reinforce privatist, instrumental values, a sense that you’re in
college for yourself and that college studies have as an end only what
comes later—a job and paying off the loan.”

Let me repeat, as a fact of some significance, that the great tuition
price spiral began in 1981. That was the same year in which Ronald
Reagan brought his jolly band of deregulators to Washington, in which
Congress enacted the landmark Kemp-Roth tax cut, and in which the
air-traffic controllers’ union went down to humiliating defeat. In 1981
the old order was crumbling, the soldiers of the free market were
strapping on their Adam Smith neckties, and colleges all across America
were deciding they needed to jack up tuition prices far in excess of the
rate of inflation, something they had not done before.

When considering the significance of this point of beginning, a 1987
inquiry into the tuition problem threw up its hands. “Nobody knows why
tuition increases lagged behind consumer prices in the 1970s and jumped
ahead in the 1980s,” according to an Associated Press summary. But in
retrospect I think the answer is obvious. It happened then because these
things are all related: deregulation, tax cuts, de-unionization and
outrageous tuition inflation are all part of the same historical turn. I
acknowledge that, on the surface, this is not an obvious connection: The
Reagan administration was always hostile to universities and loved to
bemoan the tuition spiral; what’s more, over the period in question, the
universities themselves embraced a hyper-leftist public image that
helped them distract attention from the catastrophe they have visited
upon the nation’s young.

But if we think of these things as part of a larger ideological shift,
they all start to make sense. Universities were *capable* of doing in
the ’70s what they did in the ’80s (and still are doing today), but
maybe they didn’t do it then because Americans thought of universities
in a different light in those days.

What I mean to say is that the tuition price spiral is part of the
larger history of inequality, just as is the ever-rising price of Andy
Warhol paintings, or the ever-growing size of the McMansion, or the
ever-weightier catalogs issued by Restoration Hardware—and, of course,
the *never*-increasing wages of American workers. As the rewards that
can potentially be won by members of the white-collar class have gone
from meh (in the egalitarian 1970s) to Neronian (today), it feels
natural that the entrance fee for membership in that class should have
escalated in a corresponding manner. The iron logic of inequality works
the other way as well: Although a college degree doesn’t necessarily
guarantee a life of splendor, *not* having one pretty much makes a life
of poorly compensated toil a sure thing. Finding ourselves on the
receiving end of inequality is a fate we will pay virtually any price to
avoid, and our system of higher ed exists to set and extract that price.

Put it another way: Over the last 30-odd years we have essentially
privatized higher ed. In saying this I’m not referencing the [defunding
of our State
U’s](http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2006/08/10/private#sthash.P6L2EJpu.dpbs)
(an explanation for the tuition spiral, by the way, that doesn’t get
nearly enough journalistic attention). And I am aware that a good chunk
of our institutions of higher ed have been private all along. What has
changed is that*they aren**’t “**our” institutions of higher ed
anymore*. Maybe they never were, but not too long ago it was possible to
think of them—from Milton Friedman’s University of Chicago all the way
down to Michele Bachmann’s Winona State University—as serving some sort
of public function. Whether founded by the grace of Rockefeller or by
Act of the Minnesota Legislature, they manufactured good citizens; they
taught us scientific farming techniques; hell, they built the atomic
bomb and created the Internet. This is why our government subsidized
(and still subsidizes) them with grants and earmarks and tax abatements
and preferential treatment of every description. But the other part of
the bargain doesn’t work the way it used to anymore. Everyone in the age
of inequality knows that the purpose of a college education isn’t to
benefit the nation; it’s to give the private individual a shot at
achieving a High Net Worth.

Agreeing upon that, everyone from state legislators to the Secretary of
Education naturally began to ask, Why should I pay for someone else to
get rich? Those people need to foot the bill themselves.

Agreeing upon that, the colleges and universities reconceived their
mission and began to put a more accurate price tag on what the consensus
now acknowledged that they were selling.

The whole enterprise changed. One term they used for it in the early
days, according to a landmark 1988 magazine article by Barry Werth, was
the [“Chivas Regal
argument”](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/.U5DW5Cg5j0U)—the
idea that college was a luxury good and should be treated as such.
Forget all the bushwah about diversity and lazy professors driving up
tuition; price increases in those days became virtually an end in
themselves, something colleges did simply to burnish their prestigious
brand image. Werth quoted an administrator from Lehigh University who
put the new philosophy succinctly: “If it’s going to be a world of haves
and have-nots, we sure intend to be among the haves.”

That is the offer our ever-more expensive colleges extend to their
students as well: in a world of rich and poor, the only choice before
you is whether or not you intend to purchase a place among the haves.
And these days even the once-sanctimonious New York Times runs stories
[openly treating the most expensive colleges as brands, as class
signifiers](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/education/americas-it-school-look-west-harvard.html?_r=0).

Economists who write about class issues usually depict higher ed as a
force for solving the inequality problem, not for making it worse. Other
big thinkers tell us that universities are fountainheads of innovation
and creativity, the only things we really have going for us as a nation.
Those attitudes, plus the amazing deference our professional and
political classes feel toward the hallowed groves of academe, probably
explain why this industry has been able to get away with 30 years of
something close to price gouging, a practice that would never be
tolerated from any other provider of life’s necessities. They also
explain why American students have done virtually nothing to stop the
spiral while students elsewhere take to the streets in fury when
threatened with the tiniest tuition increases.

Because in this country college fulfills a different role. Even if those
peaceful campus quadrangles were originally laid out by Quakers or by
the egalitarian Thomas Jefferson, we all know what they signify today:
They are the central symbolic device for explaining inequality. College
is where money and merit meet; where the privileged learn that they are
not only smarter than everyone else but that they are more virtuous,
too. They are better people with better test scores, better taste,
better politics. College itself is the biggest lesson of them all, the
thing that teaches us where we stand in a world that is very rapidly
coming apart.

[](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/)

[![Thomas
Frank](http://media.salon.com/2011/09/thomas_frank_square.jpg "Thomas Frank")](http://www.salon.com/writer/thomas_frank/ "Thomas Frank")

Thomas Frank is a Salon politics and culture columnist. His many books
include "What's The Matter With Kansas," "Pity the Billionaire" and "One
Market Under God." He is the founding editor of The Baffler magazine.

[](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Thomas-Frank/300407053332512)

[More Thomas
Frank.](http://www.salon.com/writer/thomas_frank/ "More Thomas Frank.")

-   [Share](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/)
-   [](whatsapp://send?text=Take%20a%20look%20at%20this%20awesome%20article:)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/)
-   [0](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/#comments)
-   -   ### All Share Services

-   [](#)

[![The results of the Academy Awards balloting are carried up the red
carpet by Price Waterhouse Coopers accountants Rick Rosas and Brad
Oltmans, February 26,
2012.](http://media.salon.com/2014/08/price_waterhouse_coopers-186x124.jpg "price_waterhouse_coopers")](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/20/wall_streets_hot_new_scam_shady_banking_consultants_absolve_the_banks_that_pay_them/)

### Wall Street’s hot new scam: Shady banking consultants absolve the banks that pay them!

Next Article

### You Might Also Like

### More Related Stories

-   [Peanut and almond butters recalled over Salmonella
    threat](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/20/peanut_and_almond_butters_recalled_over_salmonella_threat/ "Peanut and almond butters recalled over Salmonella threat")
-   [Wall Street's hot new scam: Shady banking consultants absolve the
    banks that pay
    them!](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/20/wall_streets_hot_new_scam_shady_banking_consultants_absolve_the_banks_that_pay_them/ "Wall Street's hot new scam: Shady banking consultants absolve the banks that pay them!")
-   [Brace yourself for the Nutella
    shortage](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/brace_yourself_for_the_nutella_shortage/ "Brace yourself for the Nutella shortage")
-   [My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my
    family](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/my_heartbreaking_walmart_story_how_working_there_devastated_my_family/ "My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my family")
-   [Big oil has been illegally using diesel fuel and lying about
    it](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/big_oil_has_been_illegally_using_diesel_fuel_and_lying_about_it/ "Big oil has been illegally using diesel fuel and lying about it")
-   [The Pumpkin Spice Latte is debuting in August, because Starbucks
    has absolutely no respect for
    seasons](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/15/the_pumpkin_spice_latte_is_debuting_in_august_because_starbucks_has_absolutely_no_respect_for_seasons/ "The Pumpkin Spice Latte is debuting in August, because Starbucks has absolutely no respect for seasons")
-   [GOP's one sacred principle: A spending philosophy of lies and troop
    worship](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/13/gops_one_sacred_principle_a_spending_philosophy_of_lies_and_troop_worship/ "GOP's one sacred principle: A spending philosophy of lies and troop worship")
-   ["Fake" sport, real exploitation: How pro wrestling mirrors American
    capitalism](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/12/fake_sport_real_exploitation_how_pro_wrestling_mirrors_american_capitalism_partner/)
-   [Robert Reich: Down with shareholder
    capitalism!](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/12/robert_reich_down_with_shareholder_capitalism_partner/ "Robert Reich: Down with shareholder capitalism!")
-   [Must-see morning clip: John Oliver and Sarah Silverman issue a PSA
    over payday
    loans](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/11/must_see_morning_clip_john_oliver_and_sarah_silverman_issue_a_psa_over_payday_loans/ "Must-see morning clip: John Oliver and Sarah Silverman issue a PSA over payday loans")
-   [Mitch McConnell's coal-fired claptrap: Dirty fuels and stupid
    politics in
    Kentucky](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/11/mitch_mcconnells_coal_fired_claptrap_dirty_fuels_and_stupid_politics_in_kentucky/ "Mitch McConnell's coal-fired claptrap: Dirty fuels and stupid politics in Kentucky")
-   [Billionaire's sketchy Middle East gamble: Meet the man betting on
    war with
    Iran](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/11/billionaires_sketchy_middle_east_gamble_meet_the_man_betting_on_war_with_iran/ "Billionaire's sketchy Middle East gamble: Meet the man betting on war with Iran")
-   [The truth about Bitcoin
    addiction](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/10/the_truth_about_bitcoin_addiction_partner/ "The truth about Bitcoin addiction")
-   [Walgreens caves on tax-dodging
    scheme](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/10/walgreens_caves_on_tax_dodging_scheme_partner/ "Walgreens caves on tax-dodging scheme ")
-   [Something very strange is happening in
    Miami](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/10/something_very_strange_is_happening_in_miami/ "Something very strange is happening in Miami")
-   [Amazon is losing its cool: A brief history of the corporate giant's
    public
    statements](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/09/amazons_evolving_pr_strategy_a_brief_history_of_the_companys_public_statements/ "Amazon is losing its cool: A brief history of the corporate giant's public statements")
-   [Campbell Brown's transparency problem: Why won't she say who funds
    her "ed. reform"
    group?](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/07/campbell_browns_transparency_problem_why_wont_she_say_who_funds_her_ed_reform_group/ "Campbell Brown's transparency problem: Why won't she say who funds her ")
-   [7 more goofy products that aren't worth your
    cash](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/07/7_more_goofy_products_that_arent_worth_your_cash_partner/ "7 more goofy products that aren't worth your cash")
-   [Wikipedia at war! "Monkey selfie" sets off bizarre copyright
    dispute](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/06/why_a_monkey_selfie_is_the_thin_end_of_the_wedge_for_animal_legal_rights/ "Wikipedia at war! ")
-   [America's recurring nightmare: Big banks are still too big to
    fail](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/06/americas_recurring_nightmare_big_banks_are_still_too_big_to_fail_partner/ "America's recurring nightmare: Big banks are still too big to fail")
-   [No, Twitter will not topple a crazy North Korean
    dictator](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/05/no_twitter_will_not_topple_a_crazy_north_korean_dictator/ "No, Twitter will not topple a crazy North Korean dictator")

### Featured Slide Shows

-   Share on Twitter
-   Share on Facebook
-   1 of 11
-   Close
-   Fullscreen
-   Thumbnails

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Elliott and the friends with whom he recorded in middle school in Texas
(photo courtesy of Dan Pickering)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Heatmiser publicity shot (L-R: Tony Lash, Brandt Peterson, Neil Gust,
Elliott Smith) (photo courtesy of JJ Gonson photography)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Elliott and JJ Gonson (photo courtesy of JJ Gonson photography)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

"Stray" 7-inch, Cavity Search Records (photo courtesy of JJ Gonson
photography)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Elliott's Hampshire College ID photo, 1987

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Elliott with "Le Domino," the guitar he used on "Roman Candle" (courtesy
of JJ Gonson photography)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Full "Roman Candle" record cover (courtesy of JJ Gonson photography)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Elliott goofing off in Portland (courtesy of JJ Gonson photography)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

Heatmiser (L-R: Elliott Smith, Neil Gust, Tony Lash, Brandt
Peterson)(courtesy of JJ Gonson photography)

-   Previous
-   Next

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

The Greenhouse Sleeve -- Cassette sleeve from Murder of Crows release,
1988, with first appearance of Condor Avenue (photo courtesy of Glynnis
Fawkes)

### Recent Slide Shows

[![image](http://media.salon.com/2014/07/elliott_smith_slide1-150x150.jpg)](http://www.salon.com/2014/07/13/roman_candle_turns_20_secrets_of_elliott_smiths_accidental_masterpiece_slideshow/ ""Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)")

#### "Roman Candle" turns 20: Secrets of Elliott Smith's accidental masterpiece (slideshow)

[![image](http://media.salon.com/2014/06/Screen-Shot-2014-06-26-at-5.29.35-PM-150x150.png)](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/28/tiny_houses/ "Tiny Houses")

#### Tiny Houses

[![image](http://media.salon.com/2014/06/Photo-of-Books4-150x150.jpg)](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/17/make_your_summer_more_poetic_with_these_10_international_works/ "Make Summer More Poetic with These 10 International Works")

#### Make Summer More Poetic with These 10 International Works

[![image](http://media.salon.com/2014/06/Photo-of-Books3-150x150.jpg)](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/12/8_illustrated_books_for_every_age_and_every_summer_reading_list/ "8 Illustrated Books for Every Age and Every Summer Reading List ")

#### 8 Illustrated Books for Every Age and Every Summer Reading List

-   Previous

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   

-   [Make Summer More Poetic with These 10 International
    Works](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/17/make_your_summer_more_poetic_with_these_10_international_works/ "Make Summer More Poetic with These 10 International Works")
-   [8 Illustrated Books for Every Age and Every Summer Reading
    List](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/12/8_illustrated_books_for_every_age_and_every_summer_reading_list/ "8 Illustrated Books for Every Age and Every Summer Reading List ")
-   [10 Great Science Reads That You Can Take to the
    Beach](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/11/10_great_science_reads_that_you_can_take_to_the_beach/ "10 Great Science Reads That You Can Take to the Beach")
-   [Turn Summer into a Literary Field Day with these 9 Collections of
    Non-Fiction Sports
    Writing](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/10/turn_summer_into_a_literary_field_day_with_these_9_sports_novels/ "Turn Summer into a Literary Field Day with these 9 Collections of Non-Fiction Sports Writing")
-   [Travel to Foreign Lands in 10 Newly Translated
    Novels](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/09/travel_to_foreign_lands_in_10_newly_translated_novels/ "Travel to Foreign Lands in 10 Newly Translated Novels")
-   [Get Lost in 8 Great Biographies – from Lawrence of Arabia to
    Margaret
    Fuller](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/06/get_lost_in_8_great_biographies_%e2%80%93_from_lawrence_of_arabia_to_margaret_fuller/ "Get Lost in 8 Great Biographies – from Lawrence of Arabia to Margaret Fuller")
-   [Explore Diverse Cultures Through Varied Genres with These 8 New
    Works](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/04/explore_diverse_cultures_through_varied_genres_with_these_8_new_works/ "Explore Diverse Cultures Through Varied Genres with These 8 New Works")
-   [8 Great Essay Collections for Your Reading
    Pleasure](http://www.salon.com/2014/06/02/eight_great_essay_collections_for_your_reading_pleasure/ "8 Great Essay Collections for Your Reading Pleasure")
-   [Looking for Fresh Fiction for your Summer
    Reading?](http://www.salon.com/2014/05/30/looking_for_fresh_fiction_for_your_summer_reading/ "Looking for Fresh Fiction for your Summer Reading? ")
-   [Tough love: An intimate look at Mexico City's retired (and
    semi-retired) sex
    workers](http://www.salon.com/2014/04/21/tough_love_an_intimate_look_at_mexico_citys_retired_and_semi_retired_sex_workers_partner/ "Tough love: An intimate look at Mexico City's retired (and semi-retired) sex workers")
-   [Famous literary
    meals](http://www.salon.com/2014/04/17/famous_literary_meals/ "Famous literary meals")
-   [The best and worst series finale music of all
    time](http://www.salon.com/2014/04/01/the_best_and_worst_series_finale_music_of_all_time-2/ "The best and worst series finale music of all time")
-   [Stories from a Warming Planet:
    Wildfires](http://www.salon.com/2014/04/01/stories_from_a_warming_planet_wildfires/ "Stories from a Warming Planet: Wildfires")
-   [Seven celebrity "authors" who didn't do it
    alone](http://www.salon.com/2014/03/21/seven_celebrity_authors_who_didnt_do_it_alone-2/ "Seven celebrity ")
-   [They're no "Divergent": Eight young-adult movie franchises that
    died untimely
    deaths](http://www.salon.com/2014/03/18/theyre_no_divergent_eight_young_adult_movie_franchises_that_died_untimely_deaths/ "They're no ")
-   [Space porn: These images are (quite literally) out of this
    world](http://www.salon.com/2014/03/06/space_porn_these_images_are_quite_literally_out_of_this_world/ "Space porn: These images are (quite literally) out of this world")

### Related Videos

### Comments

Loading Comments...

[Powered by Livefyre](http://livefyre.com)

### follow salon

-   [](https://www.facebook.com/salon)
-   [](http://twitter.com/salon)
-   [](https://plus.google.com/+salon/)
-   [](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/salon.com/id549374205?mt=8)
-   [](https://play.google.com/store/apps/developer?id=Salon)
-   [](http://salon.tumblr.com/)
-   [](http://pinterest.com/salonmedia/)
-   [](/rss)

brought to you by

Most Read
---------

-   [](http://www.salon.com/2006/01/24/jeffries/ "The man behind Abercrombie & Fitch")
    [The man behind Abercrombie &
    Fitch](http://www.salon.com/2006/01/24/jeffries/ "The man behind Abercrombie & Fitch")
    [Benoit
    Denizet-Lewis](http://www.salon.com/writer/benoit_denizet_lewis/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2012/09/12/breaking_bad_white_supremacist_fable/ ""Breaking Bad": White supremacist fable?")
    ["Breaking Bad": White supremacist
    fable?](http://www.salon.com/2012/09/12/breaking_bad_white_supremacist_fable/ ""Breaking Bad": White supremacist fable?")
    [Malcolm Harris](http://www.salon.com/writer/malcolm_harris/), [The
    New Inquiry](http://thenewinquiry.com/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2012/09/10/why_i_left_the_gop/ "Why I left the GOP ")
    [Why I left the
    GOP](http://www.salon.com/2012/09/10/why_i_left_the_gop/ "Why I left the GOP ")
    [Jeremiah Goulka](http://www.salon.com/writer/jeremiah_goulka/),
    TomDispatch.com
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/how_air_conditioning_remade_modern_america/ "How air conditioning remade modern America")
    [How air conditioning remade modern
    America](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/how_air_conditioning_remade_modern_america/ "How air conditioning remade modern America")
    [Henry Grabar](http://www.salon.com/writer/henry_grabar/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/cliven_bundy_vs_fergusons_peaceful_demonstrators_a_tale_of_two_protests/ "Cliven Bundy vs. Ferguson's peaceful demonstrators: A tale of two protests")
    [Cliven Bundy vs. Ferguson's peaceful demonstrators: A tale of two
    protests](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/cliven_bundy_vs_fergusons_peaceful_demonstrators_a_tale_of_two_protests/ "Cliven Bundy vs. Ferguson's peaceful demonstrators: A tale of two protests")
    [Brad Friedman](http://www.salon.com/writer/brad_friedman/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/cnn_anchors_ferguson_idea_why_not_use_water_cannons_on_the_protestors/ "CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on the protesters?")
    [CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on the
    protesters?](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/cnn_anchors_ferguson_idea_why_not_use_water_cannons_on_the_protestors/ "CNN anchor's Ferguson idea: Why not use water cannons on the protesters?")
    [Ian Blair](http://www.salon.com/writer/ian_blair/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/the_truth_about_the_ice_bucket_challenge/ "The truth about the "Ice Bucket Challenge"")
    [The truth about the "Ice Bucket
    Challenge"](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/16/the_truth_about_the_ice_bucket_challenge/ "The truth about the "Ice Bucket Challenge"")
    [Sarah Gray](http://www.salon.com/writer/sarah_gray/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/must_see_morning_clip_john_oliver_wants_to_take_unnecessary_military_equipment_away_from_ferguson_police/ "Must-see morning clip: John Oliver wants to take "unnecessary military equipment" away from Ferguson police")
    [Must-see morning clip: John Oliver wants to take "unnecessary
    military equipment" away from Ferguson
    police](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/must_see_morning_clip_john_oliver_wants_to_take_unnecessary_military_equipment_away_from_ferguson_police/ "Must-see morning clip: John Oliver wants to take "unnecessary military equipment" away from Ferguson police")
    [Prachi Gupta](http://www.salon.com/writer/prachi_gupta/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/i_was_going_to_gay_bars_having_affairs_george_takei_on_the_torments_of_life_in_the_closet/ ""I was going to gay bars, having affairs": George Takei on the torments of life in the closet")
    ["I was going to gay bars, having affairs": George Takei on the
    torments of life in the
    closet](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/i_was_going_to_gay_bars_having_affairs_george_takei_on_the_torments_of_life_in_the_closet/ ""I was going to gay bars, having affairs": George Takei on the torments of life in the closet")
    [Daniel D'Addario](http://www.salon.com/writer/daniel_daddario/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/more_horrific_details_emerge_in_christy_mack_assault_case/ "More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault case")
    [More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault
    case](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/more_horrific_details_emerge_in_christy_mack_assault_case/ "More horrific details emerge in Christy Mack assault case")
    [Jenny Kutner](http://www.salon.com/writer/jenny_kutner/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/14/john_oliver_wont_be_your_therapist_how_he_torpedoed_the_reassuring_tropes_of_fake_news/ "John Oliver won't be your therapist: How he torpedoed the reassuring tropes of fake news")
    [John Oliver won't be your therapist: How he torpedoed the
    reassuring tropes of fake
    news](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/14/john_oliver_wont_be_your_therapist_how_he_torpedoed_the_reassuring_tropes_of_fake_news/ "John Oliver won't be your therapist: How he torpedoed the reassuring tropes of fake news")
    [Steve Almond](http://www.salon.com/writer/steve_almond/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/journalist_james_wright_foley_reportedly_beheaded_by_isis/ "Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by ISIS ")
    [Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by
    ISIS](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/journalist_james_wright_foley_reportedly_beheaded_by_isis/ "Journalist James Wright Foley reportedly beheaded by ISIS ")
    [Joanna Rothkopf](http://www.salon.com/writer/joanna_rothkopf/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/my_heartbreaking_walmart_story_how_working_there_devastated_my_family/ "My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my family")
    [My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my
    family](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/18/my_heartbreaking_walmart_story_how_working_there_devastated_my_family/ "My heartbreaking Wal-Mart story: How working there devastated my family")
    [Linda Haluska](http://www.salon.com/writer/linda_haluska/)
-   [](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/must_see_morning_clip_david_letterman_delivers_moving_tribute_to_robin_williams_his_friend_of_38_years/ "Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38 years")
    [Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving tribute to
    Robin Williams, his friend of 38
    years](http://www.salon.com/2014/08/19/must_see_morning_clip_david_letterman_delivers_moving_tribute_to_robin_williams_his_friend_of_38_years/ "Must-see morning clip: David Letterman delivers moving tribute to Robin Williams, his friend of 38 years")
    [Sarah Gray](http://www.salon.com/writer/sarah_gray/)

From Around the Web
-------------------

##### Presented by Hexagram

advertisement

[![image](http://media.salon.com/2014/01/RollingStoneLogo_200.jpg)](http://www.rollingstone.com/ "Rolling Stone")

-   [](http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/george-w-bush-accepts-ice-bucket-challenge-via-laura-sneak-attack-20140820 "August 20, 2014")

    George W. Bush Accepts Ice Bucket Challenge Via Laura Sneak-Attack

-   [](http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/t-i-on-ferguson-aftermath-america-has-created-a-monster-20140820 "August 20, 2014")

    T.I. on Ferguson Aftermath: 'America Has Created a Monster'

-   [](http://www.rollingstone.com/music/live-reviews/billy-bragg-channels-social-justice-pioneers-for-impromptu-ferguson-concert-20140820 "August 20, 2014")

    Billy Bragg Channels Social Justice Pioneers for Impromptu Ferguson
    Concert

-   [](http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/garth-brooks-makes-concert-history-takes-als-ice-bucket-challenge-20140820 "August 20, 2014")

    Garth Brooks Makes Concert History, Takes ALS Ice Bucket Challenge

-   [](http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/nicki-minaj-taylor-swift-set-for-chart-battle-20140820 "August 20, 2014")

    Nicki Minaj, Taylor Swift Set for Chart Battle

[![image](http://media.salon.com/2013/07/upworthy.jpg)](http://www.upworthy.com "Upworthy")

-   [](http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/upworthy/~3/vbPEwHNegJ0/that-super-creepy-thing-some-pet-stores-are-doing-behind-your-back "August 20, 2014")

    That Super Creepy Thing Some Pet Stores Are Doing Behind Your Back

-   [](http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/upworthy/~3/KV_CcbqTfuw/what-are-the-top-3-ways-to-die-in-your-part-of-the-world "August 20, 2014")

    What Are The Top 3 Ways To Die In Your Part Of The World?

-   [](http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/upworthy/~3/MyntR5gj9WM/imagine-if-every-school-played-this-video-before-class "August 20, 2014")

    Imagine If Every School Played \*This\* Video Before Class

-   [](http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/upworthy/~3/pgskxCPHCgQ/some-women-wax-some-men-buzz-and-some-men-in-australia-are-doing-this "August 20, 2014")

    Some Women Wax. Some Men Buzz. And Some Men In Australia Are Doing
    This.

-   [](http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/upworthy/~3/noZSa4Rw9zg/the-last-ice-bucket-challenge-you-need-to-see-and-you-really-should-see-it "August 20, 2014")

    The Last Ice Bucket Challenge You Need To See — And You Really
    Should See It

[About](http://www.salon.com/about/)|[Advertising](http://www.salon.com/about/advertise/)|[Contact](http://www.salon.com/about/contact/)|[Corrections](http://www.salon.com/about/corrections/)|[Help](http://www.salon.com/about/contact/)|[Investor
Relations](http://www.salon.com/about/ir/)|[Privacy](http://www.salon.com/about/policy/)|[Terms
of Service](http://www.salon.com/about/tos/)

Copyright © 2014 Salon Media Group, Inc. Reproduction of material from
any Salon pages without written permission is strictly prohibited.\
\
 SALON ® is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office as a
trademark of Salon Media Group Inc.\
\
 Associated Press articles: Copyright © 2014 The Associated Press. All
rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast,
rewritten or redistributed.\
\

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6662697&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-88O9JRUYuy_46.gif)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.salon.com/2014/06/08/colleges_are_full_of_it_behind_the_three_decade_scheme_to_raise_tuition_bankrupt_generations_and_hypnotize_the_media/
