1.  [Skip to navigation](#navigation)
2.  [Skip to content](#content)
3.  [Skip to sidebar](#sidebar)

[](/)

**The Ludwig von Mises Institute**
==================================

[](/)

### **Advancing Austrian Economics, Liberty, and Peace**

**Advancing the scholarship of liberty in the tradition of the Austrian School**
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![Are You a
Member?](/images/Theme/images/donate3.png)](https://mises.org/donate)

![Search Mises.org](//images.mises.org/Theme/images/txt_search.gif)

-   [Store](/store/)
-   [Academy](http://academy.mises.org)
-   [Wiki](http://wiki.mises.org)

-   [Home](./)
-   [Daily](/daily/)
-   [About](/about)
-   [Blog](http://bastiat.mises.org/)
-   [Literature](/Literature)
-   [Audio / Video](/media)
-   [Events](/events/)
-   [Donate](/donate.aspx)

-   [Previous](http://mises.org/daily/2770/)
-   [Mises Daily Index](/daily/)
-   [Next](http://mises.org/daily/2772/)

The Theory of Education in the United States
============================================

**Mises Daily:** Saturday, November 17, 2007 by [Albert Jay
Nock](/daily/author/731/Albert-Jay-Nock)

-   [Article](#ArticleTab)
-   [Comments](#CommentTab)
-   [Also by Albert Jay Nock](/MisesDaily/AuthorArchive?AuthorId=731)

A

A

1.  [Introduction: Education vs Training](http://mises.org/daily/2765#I)
2.  [Dissatisfaction with American
    "Education"](http://mises.org/daily/2765#II)
3.  [Tinkering with the Mechanics of
    Education](http://mises.org/daily/2765#III)
4.  [The Educational Theory of Equality and
    Democracy](http://mises.org/daily/2765#IV)
5.  [The Literate Citizen](http://mises.org/daily/2765#V)
6.  [Classical Education](http://mises.org/daily/2765#VI)
7.  [Training, Diluted Science, and Big
    Numbers](http://mises.org/daily/2765#VII)

1.  [Drugstore Education](http://mises.org/daily/2765#VIII)
2.  [The Great Tradition](http://mises.org/daily/2765#IX)
3.  [Sound Theory and a Reasonable Precision in
    Nomenclature](http://mises.org/daily/2765#X)
4.  [But What of the Educable?](http://mises.org/daily/2765#XI)
5.  [Gresham's Law](http://mises.org/daily/2765#XII)
6.  [Vested Interest in Bad Theory](http://mises.org/daily/2765#XIII)
7.  [Conclusion and Reassurance](http://mises.org/daily/2765#XIV)

[The [Page-Barbour
Lectures](http://artsandsciences.virginia.edu/pbrlect/) for 1931 at the
[University of Virginia](http://www.virginia.edu/).]

I - Introduction: Education vs Training
---------------------------------------

![Rotunda](http://images.mises.org/DailyArticleBigImages/2765.jpg)I may
be permitted to express my great pleasure in the welcome which you have
accorded me. I am, of course, very happy to accept it as the official
welcome extended to a servant who is borrowed for the occasion by one
university from another. I trust, however, that you will allow me to
regard it also as the impersonal welcome offered by citizens of the
great republic of letters to another citizen whose only credentials and
recommendations are those with which his citizenship provides him. I may
moreover, I think, be permitted to assume that this impersonal
hospitality will be extended to cover the consideration of the subject
that I have been appointed to introduce. The constitution of our
republic recognizes no political boundaries, no distinctions of race or
nation; our allegiance to it takes precedence over every local or
personal interest. Our business here, I take it, is to consult about
matters which seriously affect the welfare of our republic, and I may
assume therefore that we are prepared to approach it in no provincial or
parochial spirit, but in a truly republican frame of mind, intent only
upon the interest to which our first allegiance is due, the interest of
the republic of letters.

The subject that I am appointed to discuss is the theory of education in
the United States. This discussion has its difficulties. It brings us
face to face with a good many serious disappointments. It calls for the
re-examination and criticism of a good many matters which seemed
comfortably settled, and which we would rather leave undisturbed. The
most discouraging difficulty about this discussion, however, is that
apparently it cannot lead to any so-called practical conclusion;
certainly not to any conclusion, as far as I can see, which will at all
answer to the general faith in machinery as an effective substitute for
thought, and the general reliance upon machinery alone to bring about
any and all forms of social improvement. If Socrates had come before the
Athenians with some fine new piece of machinery like a protective
tariff, workmen's compensation, old-age pensions, collective ownership
of the means of production, or what not; if he had told them that what
they must do to be saved was simply to install his piece of machinery
forthwith, and set it going; no doubt he would have interested a number
of people, perhaps enough to put him in office as the standard-bearer of
an enlightened and progressive liberalism. When he came before them,
however, with nothing to say but "Know thyself," they found his
discourse unsatisfactory, and became impatient with him.

So if a discussion of our educational theory could be made to lead to
something that we might call "constructive" — that is to say, something
that is immediately and mechanically practicable, like honor schools or
a new type of housing or a new style of entrance examinations — one
might hope to make it rather easily acceptable. There seems no way to do
this. The only large reforms indicated by a thorough discussion of the
topic are such as must be put down at once as quite impracticable on
general grounds, and the minor mechanical changes that are indicated
seem also impracticable on special grounds, besides having the
appearance of uncertain value and therefore being unlikely to command
interest. Yet notwithstanding this rather barren prospect for our
discussion, one thing may perhaps redeem it from absolute sterility,
which is that we are presumably always better off for knowing just where
we are, and for being able to identify and measure the forces which are
at play upon us. I do not wish to adduce too depressing a parallel in
saying that diagnosis has value even in a hopeless case. Hopelessness in
many cases, for instance in cases of incipient tuberculosis, as you
know, is circumstantial, and circumstances may change; it is almost
never flatly impossible that they should change. Diagnosis, then, has
obvious value when it shows only that in those circumstances the case is
hopeless; and even when it reveals the case as hopeless in any
circumstances, it affords at least the melancholy satisfaction of
knowing just where one stands.

We may observe then, in the first place, that our educational system has
always been the object of strong adverse criticism. No one has ever been
especially well satisfied with it, or well pleased with the way it
worked; no one, I mean, whose opinion was at the same time informed and
disinterested, and therefore worth attention. Late in the last century,
[Ernest Renan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernest_Renan) said that
"countries which, like the United States, have set up a considerable
popular instruction without any serious higher education, will long have
to expiate their error by their intellectual mediocrity, the vulgarity
of their manners, their superficial spirit, their failure in general
intelligence."

This is very hard language, and I do not propose, for the moment, that
we should undertake to say how far its severity may be fairly regarded
as justifiable. I may, however, ask you to notice two things; first, the
distinction which M. Renan draws between instruction and education, and
second, his use of the word "intelligence." We shall not lay down a
definition of education in set terms here at the outset of our
discussion; I think it would be more satisfactory if, with your
permission, we should gradually work towards the expression of our idea
of what education is, and of what an educated person is like. It is
sometimes, indeed often, difficult to construct in set terms the
definition of an object which we nevertheless recognize at once for what
it is, and about which we have no possible manner of doubt. I could not
to save my life, for instance, make a definition of an oyster; yet I am
sure I know an oyster when I see one. Moreover, in looking at an oyster,
I can point out a number of differentiations, more or less rough and
superficial, perhaps, but quite valid in helping to determine my
knowledge. So in gradually building up an expression of our idea of
education, we find the distinction drawn by M. Renan especially useful.

"Perhaps we are not fully aware of the extent to which instruction and
education are accepted as being essentially the same thing."

Perhaps we are not fully aware of the extent to which instruction and
education are accepted as being essentially the same thing. I think you
would find, if you looked into it, for instance, that all the formal
qualifications for a teacher's position rest on this understanding. A
candidate is certificated — is he not? — merely as having been exposed
satisfactorily to a certain kind of instruction for a certain length of
time, and therefore he is assumed eligible to a position which we all
agree that only an educated person should fill. Yet he may not be at all
an educated person, but only an instructed person. We have seen many
such, and five minutes' talk with one of them is quite enough to show
that the understanding of instruction as synonymous with education is
erroneous. They are by no means the same thing. Let us go no further at
present in trying to determine what education is, but merely take note
that it is not the same thing as instruction. Let us keep that
differentiation in mind, never losing sight of it for a moment, and
considering carefully every point in the practice of pedagogy at which
it is applicable. If we do this, I venture to predict that we shall turn
up an astonishing number of such points, and that our views of current
pedagogy will be very considerably modified in consequence. An educated
man must be in some sort instructed; but it is a mere [*non distributio
medii*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fallacy_of_the_undistributed_middle)
to say that an instructed person must be an educated person.

An equally useful distinction comes out in M. Renan's use of the word
"intelligence." To most of us, I think, that word does not mean the same
thing that it means to a Frenchman, or that the word *Intelligenz* means
to a German. To a Frenchman like M. Renan, intelligence does not mean a
quickness of wit, a ready dexterity in handling ideas, or even a ready
accessibility to ideas. It implies those, of course, but it does not
mean them; and one should perhaps say in passing that it does not mean
the pert and ignorant cleverness that current vulgar usage has
associated with the word. Again it is our common day-to-day experience
that gives us the best possible assistance in establishing the necessary
differentiations. We have all seen men who were quick witted, accessible
to ideas and handy with their management of them, whom we should yet
hesitate to call intelligent; we are conscious that the term does not
quite fit. The word sends us back to a phrase of Plato. The person of
intelligence is the one who always tends to "see things as they are,"
the one who never permits his view of them to be directed by convention,
by the hope of advantage, or by an irrational and arbitrary
authoritarianism. He allows the current of his consciousness to flow in
perfect freedom over any object that may be presented to it,
uncontrolled by prejudice, prepossession or formula; and thus we may say
that there are certain integrities at the root of intelligence which
give it somewhat the aspect of a moral as well as an intellectual
attribute.

Besides having laid up the benefit of a couple of extremely valuable
fundamental distinctions, we are now perhaps in a position to discern
more clearly the force of M. Renan's criticism of our educational
system. Some ten or fifteen years after M. Renan made these
observations, we find a curious corroboration of them which is
especially worth citing because it was made by one upon whom no
suspicion of superciliousness can rest. Walt Whitman was "the good gray
poet" of the common life, the prophet of the social mean. His love for
America and his faith in its institutions may, I believe, be admitted
without question. His optimism was robust and obtrusive; one might call
it flagrant. Yet we find him reflecting with great severity upon "a
certain highly deceptive superficial popular intellectuality" which he
found existing in our society of the late 1870s. He goes beyond this to
say that "our New World Democracy," whatever its success in other
directions, "is, so far, an almost complete failure in its social
aspects, and in really grand religious, moral, literary and aesthetic
results." M. Renan was a foreigner and an academician, and his
criticism, we may say, is to be taken subject to discount; he could not
be expected to appraise properly the spirit of America. Well, but, here
we have Whitman who was just the opposite of a foreigner and an
academician, who is accepted everywhere and by all as of the very spirit
of America — here we have Whitman bearing out M. Renan's criticism at
every point. What is an educational system for, one may ask, if not to
produce social results precisely opposite to those which M. Renan
testified before the fact, and Whitman testified after the fact, were
characteristic of our country? If our system, then, could do no better
than it was doing, it should be forthwith taken in hand and overhauled.

II - Dissatisfaction with American "Education"
----------------------------------------------

Taken in hand it accordingly was, about thirty-five years ago, and very
energetically. Dissatisfaction focused about the thesis that our system
was out of relation to life. Something must be done with it to make our
children grow up as men of their time, and prepare them to face
actuality. Too much attention had been paid to the languages, literature
and history of classical antiquity, which were all of far less than
doubtful value to the youth of twentieth-century America. The thing now
was to introduce the sciences, living languages and the useful arts, to
make instruction vocational, to open all manner of opportunities for
vocational study, and to induce youth into our institutions for pretty
strictly vocational purposes. All this was done; the process amounted to
a revolution, carried out with extraordinary thoroughness and in an
astonishingly short time. Hardly any debris of the old order remains
except, curiously, the insignia of certain proficiencies; these now
survive as mere vestiges. You are as well aware as I, for example, of
what a bachelor's degree in the liberal arts now represents. Some new
insignia have been devised, and one or two borrowed from the systems of
other countries, like the degree of doctor of philosophy, which fulfills
the humble but possibly necessary function of a factory-inspection
label, some say a trade-union label; perhaps it is both. Aside from
these insignia, however, nothing is left; our system underwent a
revolutionary renovation. Exponents of the new order have had their way
unhindered, and have been able to command an almost inconceivable amount
of money and enthusiasm in support of their plans and policies.

Yet after three decades of this, our system gives no better
satisfaction, apparently, than it did before. At no time during this
period has it given satisfaction; hence the period has been one of
incessant tinkering, the like of which probably has never been seen
anywhere in the world. Method after method, device after device,
readjustment after readjustment, have been tried, scrapped, revived and
modified, and then tried again. One might say that the field of our
pedagogy during these three decades has been the drill ground of
empiricism; large areas of it, indeed, seem to have been, and still seem
to be, the hunting-ground of quackery. One cannot too much wonder at the
high hopefulness attending this unconscionable revel of experimentation.
Yes, yes, we kept saying, let us but just install this one new method in
the secondary schools, or this one new set of curricular changes in the
undergraduate college, or this one grand new scheme for broadening the
scope of university instruction, and in a year or so it will prove
itself to be the very thing we have all along been needing; and this,
that or the other batch of pedagogical problems will be laid to eternal
rest. Such, I think, is a fair summary of our thirty years' experience;
the details of it are no doubt well known to you, and many of them will
probably recur to your memory at once, perhaps in some cases with a
rather strong appeal to your sense of humor.

"We seem now to be at the moment when every conceivable mode of
tinkering has been applied at every available point in our educational
system, and when nobody can think of anything more to do."

Ingenuity, however, when applied *in limine*, must some time reach the
end of its exercise, and that time seems now to have come. We seem now
to be at the moment when every conceivable mode of tinkering has been
applied at every available point in our educational system, and when
nobody can think of anything more to do. Professional educators are
carrying on as best they can, occasionally pausing to consider the gains
which accrued from the revolution of thirty years ago, and which the
efforts of three decades have been devoted to consolidating. From what
some of them say, it might appear that these gains are relatively
inconsiderable, hardly worth the crushing price set by the turmoil of a
revolution and the distracting toil of consolidation. Many professional
educators, even some veterans of the revolution who fought behind the
barricades and manfully worked the guillotine in the hour of triumph —
even some of these seem now to be in the mood of self-examination,
wondering, like Mr. Weller's charity boy at the end of the alphabet,
whether it was worth going through so much to get so little.
Dissatisfaction is, of course, a noble and invaluable attribute of man;
one should never, strictly speaking, be satisfied with anything, least
of all with the social institutions and mechanisms which we create. The
lively and peremptory exercise of dissatisfaction is the first condition
of progress; one wishes that Americans at large had a better
understanding of its uses. But dissatisfaction with something which may
and should be made to work better, differs in quality from
dissatisfaction with something which gives no hope of ever being made to
work at all. Dissatisfaction in the realm of the airplane is a very
different thing in quality from dissatisfaction in the realm of the
perpetual-motion device. In the one case, the application of ingenuity
may, and often does, improve the machine and makes it work better. In
the other case, when all the resources of ingenuity are exhausted, the
machine gives only a semblance of working, without the reality.

In criticism of the present state of our educational system,
nonprofessional opinion appears to be in pretty close agreement with the
opinion lately expressed by many of our professional educators. A few
months ago, an Italian nobleman, one of the most accomplished men in
Europe, told me that he had had a curious experience in our country; he
wondered whether I had made anything like the same observation, and if
so, how I accounted for it. He said he had been in America several
times, and had met some very well-educated men, as an Italian would
understand the term; but they were all in the neighborhood of sixty
years old. Under that age, he said, he had happened upon no one who
impressed him as at all well-educated.

I told him that he had been observing the remnant of a prerevolutionary
product, and coming from a country that had had the [Sicilian
Vespers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sicilian_Vespers) and
[Rienzi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cola_di_Rienzo) and
[Masaniello](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masaniello) and now
[Mussolini](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benito_Mussolini), he should
easily understand what that meant; that our educational system had been
thoroughly reorganized, both in spirit and structure, about thirty-five
years ago, and that his well-educated men of sixty or so were merely
holdovers from what we now put down, by general consent, as the times of
ignorance — holdovers from pre-Fascist days, if I might borrow the
comparison.

"But," I went on, "our younger men are really very keen; they are men of
parts, and our schools and universities do an immense deal for them.
Just try to come round one of them about the merits of a bond-issue or a
motor-car, the fine points of commercial cake-icing or retail shoe
merchandising, or the problems of waste motion involved in bricklaying
or in washing dishes for a hotel, and you are sure to find that he will
give a first-rate account of himself, and that he reflects credit on the
educational system that turned him out."

My friend looked at me a moment in a vacant kind of way, and presently
said that proficiency in these pursuits was not precisely what he had in
mind when he spoke of education.

"Just so," I replied, "but it is very much what we have in mind. We are
all for being practical in education. Do you know, it would not surprise
me in the least to find that our Russian friends had taken a leaf out of
our book in designing their Five-Year Plan?"

He looked at me again for a moment, and changed the subject. I thought
of explaining myself, but saw it would be of no use; my little
pleasantry had been dashed to pieces against the solid adamant of his
patrician seriousness.

"The lively and peremptory exercise of dissatisfaction is the first
condition of progress…"

It is unquestionably an interesting problem that is set for us by the
fact that with everything its own way, with no lack of means or moral
support, our system should bring forth secondary schools which lie
helpless under the formidable indictment of Mr. Learned, and
universities which lie helpless under the equally formidable indictment
of Mr. Flexner. As for our undergraduate colleges, the president of
Columbia University, Mr. Butler, was quoted in the press only the other
day as saying that they had been trying all through the
postrevolutionary period to find an effective substitute for their
discarded curriculum, and had not yet succeeded.[[1]](#note1)

I may remind you of similarly depressing utterances made recently by the
late president of Brown, the president of Haverford, Mr. Gauss of
Princeton, the late Mr. Giddings of Columbia, and many others. An
inquiry made last winter into New York City's elementary schooling
reached the conclusion that many more than one-third of the pupils
cannot be dragged through the work assigned them; and this in spite of
considerable official pressure upon teachers to promote pupils without
too close regard to the quality of their work. At the fifty-fifth
anniversary of the founding of Johns Hopkins University, Mr. Lang said
that the type of education offered in our new million-dollar high
schools is about one-twentieth as valuable as the kind given in the
traditional little red schoolhouse of a generation ago. Last spring, at
a conference of educators in Florida, there was practical unanimity,
according to the press reports, in the opinion that our educational
system is a failure. Mr. Butler again, in a public utterance, permits
himself the desponding observation that the results of our educational
endeavors "are admitted to be anything but satisfactory." Only the other
day, the head master of Harrow, speaking of the corruption that has set
in upon our English speech, observed that England is "exposed to the
whole backwash of the United States, where there are a hundred million
people who have very little literary tradition."

I need not continue these depressing citations; you may carry them to
any length you like by following the newspapers from week to week. There
seems no room for doubt that the quality of our educational system's
product is as unfavorably regarded now as it was thirty-five years ago,
and that the force of criticism, professional and lay, against our
system has not abated, but rather the contrary. While the systems of
Holland, Scandinavia, Belgium, Germany, France, with little money and
relatively poor equipment, keep turning out at least a moderately
acceptable product, our rich and well-equipped foundations elaborate a
product that is on all sides regarded as quite unacceptable. This is a
strange state of things, and as I have said, it presents an interesting
problem for our examination — a problem which we may presently consider.

III - Tinkering with the Mechanics of Education
-----------------------------------------------

I have mentioned the fact that our system has been subjected to
incessant tinkering throughout the postrevolutionary period. We may now
observe that all this tinkering has been purely mechanical and external;
it has been applied exclusively to the structure and mechanics of the
system. We have devised or imported the mechanics of this or that
method, and sought to incorporate them; the inductive method, the Gary
method, the Montessori method, and so on. We have scrapped one piece of
curricular machinery after another, and introduced new ones. I do not
recall the names of more than one or two of them, they are so many and
have come and gone in such quick succession. Lately, however, as I
remember, we have been hearing about the University of Wisconsin plan,
the University of Chicago plan, the Harvard plan, and I think I recall
seeing somewhere that Yale has recently come forward with a new plan,
abolishing certain courses and certain examinations, and introducing
something called "reading periods" by way of substitute. I do not speak
in disparagement of these innumerable plans and methods, for I do not
know enough about them to criticize them either favorably or
unfavorably. I am a man of letters, not a mechanician or an actuary, and
hence my opinion of their specific merit or lack of merit is without
value. I merely ask you to remark that they are of a purely mechanical
nature, and that as far as I know, all the effort that has been expended
on improving our system during the last thirty-five years has been
directed exclusively towards its mechanics.

Now, we may admit that our system, like any other social institution, is
a machine, and that any machine is all the better for very careful
tending, and that most machines are susceptible of further
differentiation and improvement. Whatever care and ingenuity, therefore,
has been exercised in these directions in behalf of our educational
system has perhaps been well spent. But there is something more to be
thought of. Any machine has some kind of theory behind it; and when you
have a machine that has had every possible resource of mechanical
ingenuity and care expended on it, and yet will not work satisfactorily,
the situation at once suggests that something may be amiss with its
theory. Perhaps its theory is all wrong, hopelessly wrong; the
perpetual-motion devices that we occasionally hear of are instances of
this. They are, let us say, mechanically perfect, and as far as
mechanics go, they should work perfectly, but they do not work; so we
examine their theory, and we at once discover not only why they do not
work but also why no machine of the kind can possibly work. Again,
perhaps there has been some little slip somewhere in our apprehension of
the theory, something overlooked, some minor error that needs to be
straightened out, and the structure of our machine correspondingly
modified. Well, this can be managed, possibly with ease, possibly the
necessary adjustments are slight and simple; but the theory of the
machine must be re-examined before anything can be done intelligently.
My point is that a complete and clear idea of the theory behind a
machine is valuable; and that as far as I am aware, with all the
attention that has been bestowed on the mechanics of our educational
system, no one has looked critically into its theory. Perhaps the time
for that has only now come. At all events, since we have quite reached
the end of our tether in the mechanics of the matter — there seems to be
no possible doubt of that — and since we are mostly, save for the
Micawbers and Panglosses among us, looking at one another in a rather
bewildered and forlorn way, wondering what to do next, we may at least
passively entertain the idea of examining the theory of the thing with
which we have been so long hopefully tinkering.

IV - The Educational Theory of Equality and Democracy
-----------------------------------------------------

First, then, we may remark that at the root of that theory (not, indeed,
forming a part of it, but of great influence in shaping it and getting
it translated into practice) lay one of the most humane, honorable and
engaging sentiments that are in the power of human nature to generate or
to indulge. I refer to the sentiment which prompted our ancestors to
determine that their children should have a better chance at the good
life, the humane life, than circumstances had permitted themselves to
have. If you go through our literature with an eye out for evidences of
this sentiment, I think you may be astonished to see how constantly they
appear, and I am sure you will be touched by their profound and pathetic
eloquence. I am sure, too, that you will be interested in observing the
number of points in our institutional life that this sentiment has
touched, and in marking the reach of its power. I greatly doubt that a
similar sentiment has ever held so commanding a position in the
development of any modern society. It would be an easy and pleasant task
to dwell on instances of that sentiment's operation, to remark the
uncomplaining acquiescence in great personal sacrifices which its
indulgence involved. But this is not necessary; we have all seen such
instances, no doubt some of us have participated in them as
beneficiaries. We have said enough, I think, to show with what
veneration we should regard this sentiment, and with what delicacy we
should speak of it even when we are obliged to regard its exercise as
misdirected; for seriously misdirected it often was, and often is. We
may observe, we must in justice observe, that this sentiment has often
been very imperfectly and poorly interpreted by those who indulged it
most prodigally; and never oftener than now. Its interpretation
frequently betrays a vast ignorance of what the humane life really is,
and of the discipline whereby alone one may make progress towards this
life. We must judge these misinterpretations impartially and severely,
for if they are not so judged before the tribunal of letters, they will
be judged nowhere else; there is no other court competent to pass
judgment on them. But our very impartiality and our commitment to
severity are such as powerfully reinforce our natural disposition to
maintain a just reverence for the nobleness and purity of the sentiment
itself.

This sentiment, I say, served as a quickening spirit, not an
enlightening spirit. Its ministrations moved us to the construction, by
no means deliberate but quite at haphazard, of an educational theory
which may be decomposed into three basic ideas or principles. The first
idea was that of equality; the second, that of democracy; and the third
idea was that the one great assurance of good public order and honest
government lay in a literate citizenry. I need not remind you of Mr.
Jefferson's passionate faith in this third idea, and his insistence upon
it in season and out of season. It was in his day a speculative idea,
which commanded quite wide consent among thoughtful persons, but which
the subsequent test of practice has rather tended to explode. These
three ideas are the fundamental ones in our theory of education today,
precisely as they were in Mr. Jefferson's time. They remain unmodified,
and even, as I said, unexamined; they are taken as axiomatic, and all
the mechanism of our system, the whole of our pedagogical practice from
the primary school to the university, is built upon them.

These ideas or principles, then, are what we must consider if we propose
to turn from the mechanics of our system to its theory. If we find
anything wrong with them, anything unsound, we may at once apply our
findings to see how the working of our mechanism is affected, and what
results a clarification or straightening-up of our theory in those
respects might be presumed to have.

Let us proceed, then, to examine the first of these principles, the
principle of equality. We need bring forward no evidence that the
doctrine of equality is a sound one, or to prove that
[Menander](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menander) was as right in his
exhortation to "choose equality" as he was in his observation that "evil
communications corrupt good manners." The idea of equality was very much
abroad in the land in the early days of the republic; the French
revolutionary formula of "liberty, equality, fraternity" helped in
keeping it to the fore. But we perceive at once the necessity of
discriminating between a sound philosophical doctrine, such as the
doctrine of equality is, and the popular formulation of that doctrine,
which may be fantastically unsound. There is usually a great difference
between these two, as great a difference, as a rule, as there is between
truth and untruth. The classical example, probably, is that of Christian
doctrine. Again, the doctrine of Socialism, or of Communism, is one
thing, and the set of fanciful credenda which popular imagination has
conceived of as belonging to it is quite another thing — for instance,
the curious notion which you find widely held, that Socialism has for
its aim the arbitrary division of the world's wealth among its
population, men, women and children, share and share alike. Again, the
doctrine of the single tax is almost universally believed to concern a
tax on land, which is precisely what it does not at all concern, instead
of a hundred-per-cent tax on the rent of land. Thus, again, the doctrine
of equality and its corollaries and implications have undergone the most
astounding popular misunderstanding; you may remember, perhaps, the
humorous and not much exaggerated popular formulation of it in the
saying that "in the United States one man is just exactly as good as
another, or a little better." Indeed, in the social sphere, the doctrine
of equality has regularly been degraded into a kind of charter for rabid
self-assertion on the part of ignorance and vulgarity; in the political
sphere it has served as a warrant for the most audacious and flagitious
exercise of self-interest. So, when we set about the examination of this
doctrine in relation to our educational system, we must first and above
all ascertain which doctrine of equality it is that we find at the basis
of our system; is it the philosophical doctrine recommended by Menander
and espoused by Mr. Jefferson, or is it a popular doctrine which neither
of them could or would recognize?

"The doctrine of equality has regularly been degraded into a kind of
charter for rabid self-assertion on the part of ignorance and
vulgarity."

There is no possible doubt about the answer. Our system is based upon
the assumption, popularly regarded as implicit in the doctrine of
equality, that everybody is educable. This has been taken without
question from the beginning; it is taken without question now. The whole
structure of our system, the entire arrangement of its mechanics;
testifies to this. Even our truant laws testify to it, for they are
constructed with exclusive reference to school age, not to
school-ability. When we attempt to run this assumption back to the
philosophical doctrine of equality, we cannot do it; it is not there,
nothing like it is there. The philosophical doctrine of equality gives
no more ground for the assumption that all men are educable than it does
for the assumption that all men are six feet tall. We see at once, then,
that it is not the philosophical doctrine of equality, but an utterly
untenable popular perversion of it, that we find at the basis of our
educational system.

We shall probably recur to this doctrine later by a round-about way. For
the present we may dismiss our *a priori* consideration of it with a
single interesting and significant reference. We may believe, I think,
that no more sincere believer in the doctrine of equality ever lived
than Mr. Jefferson; certainly none more intelligent, yet the plan that
he drafted for public education in the state of Virginia is the severest
possible judgment against the popular perversion which we have followed
ever since his day, and are still following. Mr. Chinard, of the faculty
of literature at Johns Hopkins, who probably knows more about Mr.
Jefferson than any one else in the country knows, thinks that his plan
may have had a good deal to do with shaping the French system, which, as
you know, differs from ours in being rigidly selective. In outline, Mr.
Jefferson's plan was this: Every child in the State should be taught
reading, writing and common arithmetic; the old-fashioned primary-school
course in the three R's. Each year the best pupil in each primary school
should be sent to the grammar schools, of which there were to be twenty,
conveniently located in various parts of the State; they were to be kept
there one or two years, and then dismissed, except "the best genius of
the whole," who should be continued there for the full term of six
years. "By this means," wrote Mr. Jefferson, "twenty of the best
geniuses shall be raked from the rubbish annually." I venture to call
your attention to these rather forceful words, as showing how far this
great believer in equality was from anything like acceptance of our
official assumption that everybody is educable. But this is not all. At
the end of six years the best ten out of the twenty should be sent to
William and Mary College, and the rest turned adrift. Mr. Jefferson's
plan appears selective with a vengeance in our eyes, accustomed as they
are to the spectacle of immense hordes of inert and ineducable persons
slipping effortlessly through our secondary schools, colleges,
universities, on ways that seem greased for their especial benefit. Of
the twenty best geniuses annually raked from the rubbish of a whole
State, only fifty percent were destined to reach the undergraduate
college!

The second idea which we are to examine is that of democracy; our system
is professedly democratic. Let us see what this means. Here we find
something more than a popular perversion of a philosophically sound
doctrine, which is what we found in our examination of the idea of
equality. Here we find something even stranger and more interesting, a
perversion upon a perversion. Political theory of the eighteenth century
was based upon the right of individual self-expression in politics; its
essence was that those who vote, rule. Its chosen machinery was that of
a republic, as affording the best power or purchase for the free
expression of this right. As a matter of logic, when everybody votes,
you have a democracy; the registration of democratic judgment is a mere
matter of counting ballots. Thus a confusion of terms set in; a republic
in which everybody voted was accepted as a democracy and was so styled,
as it still is. This confusion persists, and the evidence of it is on
every other page of many, I think the great majority, of serious
writers. In fact, we may say that the terms republican and democratic
have come to be regarded as synonymous. This is not greatly to be
wondered at, because it is only lately that anything like a general
sense of the unsoundness of eighteenth-century political theory has
begun to prevail. The iron force of circumstance has finally made us
aware that it is not, never was and never will be, those who vote that
rule, but those who own; that you may extend the suffrage in a republic
as far as you please without making any significant change in the actual
rulership of the country. Republicanism does not, therefore, of itself
even imply democracy. At the present time it is a matter of open and
notorious knowledge that some monarchies are much more forward in
democracy than some republics, even republics in which suffrage is
universal. The antithesis of republicanism is monarchy, if you like, but
monarchy is not the antithesis of democracy. The antithesis of democracy
is absolutism; and absolutism may, and notoriously does, prevail under a
republican regime as freely as under any other. Thus democracy is not a
matter of an extension of the franchise, not a matter of the individual
citizen's right of self-expression in politics, as the political
philosophy of the eighteenth century regarded it. It is a matter of the
diffusion of ownership; a true doctrine of democracy is a doctrine of
public property.

"The philosophical doctrine of equality gives no more ground for the
assumption that all men are educable than it does for the assumption
that all men are 6 feet tall."

A philosophical historian measures the value of a revolution, not by its
political achievements, not by the various social emancipations and
ameliorations that it brings about, but by the quality of the idea that
it liberates upon the world. The idea of the right of individual
self-expression in politics had been formulated before 1789, it had been
advanced and advocated by social philosophers, but the French Revolution
liberated it, diffused it everywhere, made its terms a common glossary.
Just so, the Russian Revolution liberated the idea that democracy is not
a political status at all, but an economic status. This idea also had
long been accepted by many social philosophers. It was implicit in the
doctrine of the Physiocrats, of Gumplovicz of Graz, of Theodor Hertzka,
explicitly recognized by Marx, and elaborated in our own country by
Henry George. But the explosion of the Russian Revolution liberated the
idea, blew it, we may say, into all men's heads and lodged it fast
there, so that now, consciously or unconsciously, intelligently or
unintelligently, they interpret democracy to themselves in some kind of
economic terms. This revelation of democracy as an economic status was
no doubt purely a byproduct of the Russian Revolution; such, too, was
the idea liberated by the French Revolution. Revolutionists do not
habitually think in academic terms. But it is by the quality of the
liberated idea, not by the ups and downs of the Five-Year Plan, not by
the ups and downs of organized Communism, not by the merits or demerits
of any social or administrative machinery peculiar to the Soviet regime,
that the philosophical historian will estimate the real significance of
the Russian Revolution. We see, then, that the political philosophy of
the eighteenth century had a wholly erroneous notion of the nature of
democracy, and that it was this erroneous notion which has lasted all
through our history, namely, that democracy is a political status, and
that it is to be achieved or realized by an extension of the franchise.
Meanwhile, on the top of this, which we may call an academic error, grew
the popular error which accepted as democratic whatever was merely
indiscriminate. This error, too, has persisted down to our time. The
people of Philadelphia in
[Genêt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmond-Charles_Genêt)'s day, who
wore cockades in their hats and called one another "citizen" no doubt
believed that they were giving an exhibition of democratic manners. They
were not; they were giving an exhibition of bizarre manners, vulgar
manners. It is a commonplace of our journalism to speak of some highly
placed person as having democratic manners when he is only affable, or
sometimes when he is only coarse and rude. There is no such thing as
democratic manners; manners are either bad or good. "A man thinks to
show himself my equal by showing himself
[grob](http://www.dict.cc/?s=grob)," said Heine; "he does not show
himself my equal; he shows himself *grob*."

Interested popular definition, like interested legal definition, is a
process, as a contemporary of Bishop Butler said, by which anything can
be made to mean anything. The popular idea of democracy is animated by a
very strong resentment of superiority. It resents the thought of an
elite — the thought that there are practicable ranges of intellectual
and spiritual experience, achievement and enjoyment, which by nature are
open to some and not to all. It deprecates and disallows this thought,
and discourages it by every available means. As the popular idea of
equality postulates that in the realm of the spirit everybody is able to
enjoy everything that anybody can enjoy, so the popular idea of
democracy postulates that there shall be nothing worth enjoying for
anybody to enjoy that everybody may not enjoy; and a contrary view is at
once exposed to all the evils of a dogged, unintelligent, invincibly
suspicious resentment.

"We see at once, then, that it is not the philosophical doctrine of
equality, but an utterly untenable popular perversion of it, that we
find at the basis of our educational system."

The whole institutional life organized under the popular idea of
democracy, then, must reflect this resentment. It must aim at no ideals
above those of the average man; that is to say, it must regulate itself
by the lowest common denominator of intelligence, taste and character in
the society which it represents. In a society governed by this idea, for
example, schools like the Crown Patronage Schools of Prussia would be
resented as undemocratic. The advantage of such schools, obviously, is,
first, that of being founded by a sovereign whose position raises him
above a great many petty and local considerations, and thus largely
enables him to view their plan disinterestedly; and second, that the
sovereign can command not only the most competent but also the most
disinterested advice. Hence they would probably be better schools than
those which might be set up by a local school board appointed by a mayor
or elected by popular vote. The spirit of democracy, however, would look
askance at schools established by an absolute sovereign, with the advice
of men like [von
Humboldt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_von_Humboldt) and
[Schleiermacher](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedrich_Daniel_Ernst_Schleiermacher),
because in its view the first business of a school is not to be good,
but as our phrase goes, "to give the people what they want"; and this is
what the school set up by the mayor and school board is much more likely
to do. Animating this view is the touchy and resentful assurance that it
is no sovereign's or scholar's business to suggest what the people
should want or might profitably want; who is any von Humboldt or
Schleiermacher that he should offer gratuitous advice about what our
children should learn or how they should be taught?

We perceive at once, of course, that all this has actually nothing to do
with democracy; but quite clearly it is all in the popular
interpretation of democracy, and it is with this, rather than with any
rational notion of democracy, that our educational system has always
been obliged to reckon. We must face the fact, and we may face it with
the dignity and disinterestedness appropriate to scholars, that an
examination of our system from end to end shows its theory to be as
unsound in respect to democracy as we found it to be in respect of
equality. Look at it anywhere, strike into it at any point you like, and
the working of its mechanism will testify to a theory that is not
equalitarian but pseudo-equalitarian; a theory that is not democratic,
but egregiously and preposterously pseudo-democratic.

V - The Literate Citizen
------------------------

With regard to the third idea that enters into our educational theory,
the idea that good government and a generally wholesome public order are
conditioned upon having a literate citizenry, not much need be said. We
have already mentioned Mr. Jefferson's strong insistence on this
doctrine, and we may now recall the warmth and enthusiasm that he showed
for it in a letter congratulating a Spanish correspondent on some steps
that the Spanish government was proposing to take against illiteracy.
Mr. Jefferson's reasoning was that citizens who could read had the means
of being correctly informed about public affairs, and that if they were
correctly informed they might be trusted to do the right thing about
them. There are certain defects in this reasoning upon which we need not
dwell. We may observe, however, without at all disparaging literacy,
that in general the mere ability to read raises no very extravagant
presumptions upon the person who has it. Surely everything depends upon
what he reads, and upon the purpose that guides him in reading it. It is
interesting to note that one who might be called Mr. Jefferson's
contemporary (he died when Mr. Jefferson was nine years old) furnishes
us with precisely the right criticism upon this point. This was [Joseph
Butler, bishop of Durham](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Butler),
the revered author of the
[*Analogy*](http://www.ccel.org/ccel/butler/analogy.html), and one of
the four greatest in all the Church of England's long roster of great
men. Bishop Butler made the acute observation that the majority of men
are much more apt at passing things through their minds than they are at
thinking about them. Hence, he said, considering the kind of thing we
read and the kind of attention we bestow on it, very little of our time
is more idly spent than the time spent in reading.

"We may observe, however, without at all disparaging literacy, that in
general the mere ability to read raises no very extravagant presumptions
upon the person who has it."

For evidence of this one has but to look at our large literate
population, to remark its intellectual interests, the general furniture
of its mind, as these are revealed by what it reads: by the colossal,
the unconscionable volume of garbage annually shot upon the public from
the presses of the country, largely in the form of newspapers and
periodicals. On the other hand, too, we may regard the negative
testimony furnished by the extremely exiguous existence among us of
anything like a serious literature, especially a serious periodical
literature. It must be clear, I think, that any expectations put upon
the saving grace of literacy are illusory.

We have found, then, three most serious errors in the theory upon which
the mechanics of our educational system were designed. This theory
contemplates a fantastic and impracticable idea of equality, a fantastic
and impracticable idea of democracy, and a fantastically exaggerated
idea of the importance of literacy in assuring the support of a sound
and enlightened public order. It is not necessary, I think, to go
further in the examination of our educational theory, after finding in
it three errors of the first magnitude. We may now go on to observe how
directly certain structural defects and mechanical failures in our
system, and certain misconceptions of function as well, are traceable to
these errors of theory. Before doing so, however, let us notice how well
these errors complement one another, and how orderly they fall in behind
the admirable sentiment that we noticed at the outset of our discussion.
First, there was this strong sentiment for one's children, and for their
progress in a civilized life. The conception of a civilized life, of its
nature, and of the way to enter into it, was and is often most
imperfect, but no matter; the sentiment was in itself noble and
disinterested. One's children should have, at any cost or sacrifice, all
the education they could get. Then, playing directly into the hand of
this sentiment, there was the idea of equality prompting the belief that
they were all capable of taking in and assimilating what there was to be
had; and then the idea of democracy, prompting the belief that the whole
subject matter of education should be common property, not common in a
true and proper sense, but, roughly, in the sense that so much of it as
was not manageable by everybody should be disallowed and disregarded.
Then finally, all this had the general sanction of a pseudo-patriotic
idea that in thus doing one's best for one's children, one was also
doing something significant in the way of service to one's country. You
may see easily, I think, how this theory would work out in practice, and
what sort of mechanism would naturally be required to make it effective;
hence you may see just what sort of educational system would grow up
under the conditions set by this theory. I think further that if you
compare the kind of system that you thus imagine with the system that we
actually have, you will find a very close correspondence between them;
and that the more you particularize the comparison, point by point, the
closer you will find the correspondence to be.

VI - Classical Education
------------------------

Traditionally, an educational system was conceived of as an organic
whole, with distinct lines fixed between its units; and each unit was
supposed to exercise its function with strict reference to the units
preceding and succeeding it. When we organized our system, this was also
our general plan. Our units were the primary and secondary schools, the
undergraduate college, the university and the technical school. The
intention was that a person should proceed directly through the primary
school into the secondary school, and through that into the
undergraduate college. On leaving college, he was prepared to enter the
university, if he was looking forward to one of the four so-called
"learned" professions. Otherwise, if he proposed to occupy himself with
one of the sciences, or with some pursuit like agriculture,
architecture, engineering, for which a considerable technical training
is necessary, he was also prepared to begin that; he was qualified to
enter the institute of science or the technical school. I do not say
that this intention was always and everywhere carried out; at the
University of Paris, in the sixteenth century, students entered under
the faculty of law with very little preparation, sometimes with none. In
a new civilization like ours, local poverty, poor equipment, the
scarcity of teachers, and other difficult obstacles stood in the way of
orderly consecutive progress through all these grades. Nevertheless,
this was the intention; and in general, probably, it was as well kept to
as circumstances permitted.

"The popular idea of democracy is animated by a very strong resentment
of superiority."

The intention was, moreover — and this is most important — that the
character of this progress through the schools and the undergraduate
college, right up to the doors of the university or technical school,
should be purely disciplinary. The curricula of the primary and
secondary school and of the college should be fixed, invariable, the
same for all participants. There should be no elective studies. The
student took what was deemed best for him, or left the place; he had no
choice. Hence there was no overlapping or reduplication of function
anywhere along the line. The college, for example, did not reach back
into the work of the secondary school to fill up any holes or take up
any slack in the student's career there. If the student came to college
unprepared in any particular, he was unprepared, and there was nothing
to do about it but to remand him. No more did the college reach forward
into the purview of the university or the technical school with any
prevocational or preprofessional exercises. Each institution kept
strictly to the doings in its own bailiwick, as a unit in a general
system.

Such, I say, is the traditional way in which the mechanism of an
educational system is supposed to work; and such, speaking broadly and
with regard to the force of circumstances, was the way that our
mechanism was set up to work. The progress through school and college
did, in fact, remain quite strictly disciplinary up to the revolutionary
period which set in, as well as one can put a date to it, about
thirty-five years ago. Now, it was of the very essence of this
disciplinary character — the very fifth essence, as a medievalist might
say — that all the knowledge canvassed in these fixed curricula should
be of the order known as formative. Instrumental knowledge, knowledge of
the sort which bears directly on doing something or getting something,
should have no place there; it should have as strict an institutional
quarantine raised against it as cities raise against a plague. This
discrimination was quite carefully regarded in our institutions until
the revolution of thirty-five years ago broke it down. I suggest that we
look for a moment at the disciplinary fixed curricula made up of purely
formative studies, to see what it actually came to in practice.

Let us look at it in this way: let us suppose that an educable person
found good schools and a good college, where all circumstances were
favorable there were such — what would he do, and what might be expected
of him? After the three R's, or rather for a time in company with them,
his staples were Latin, Greek, and mathematics. He took up the elements
of these two languages very early, and continued at them, with
arithmetic and algebra, nearly all the way through the primary, and all
the way through the secondary schools. Whatever else he did, if
anything, was inconsiderable except as related to these major subjects;
usually some readings in classical history, geography, and mythology.
When he reached the undergraduate college at the age of sixteen or so,
all his language difficulties with Greek and Latin were forever behind
him; he could read anything in either tongue, and write in either, and
he was thus prepared to deal with both literatures purely as literature,
to bestow on them a purely literary interest. He had also in hand
arithmetic and algebra as far as quadratics. Then in four years at
college he covered practically the whole range of Greek and Latin
literature; mathematics as far as the differential calculus, and
including the mathematics of elementary physics and astronomy; a brief
course, covering about six weeks, in formal logic; and one as brief in
the bare history of the formation and growth of the English language.

What was the purpose of this? We may admit, I presume, the disciplinary
value of these studies, since that has never been seriously disputed, so
far as I know, but we may say a word, perhaps, about their formative
character. The literatures of Greece and Rome comprise the longest and
fullest continuous record available to us, of what the human mind has
been busy about in practically every department of spiritual and social
activity — every department, I think, except one: music. This record
covers twenty-five hundred consecutive years of the human mind's
operations in poetry, drama, law, agriculture, philosophy, architecture,
natural history, philology, rhetoric, astronomy, politics, medicine,
theology, geography, everything. Hence the mind that has attentively
canvassed this record is not only a disciplined mind but an
*experienced* mind — a mind that instinctively views any contemporary
phenomenon from the vantage point of an immensely long perspective
attained through this profound and weighty experience of the human
spirit's operations. If I may paraphrase the words of Emerson, this
discipline brings us into the feeling of an immense longevity, and
maintains us in it. You may perceive at once, I think, how different
would be the view of contemporary men and things, how different the
appraisal of them, the scale of values employed in their measurement, on
the part of one who has undergone this discipline and on the part of one
who has not. These studies, then, in a word, were regarded as formative
because they are *maturing*, because they powerfully inculcate the views
of life and the demands on life that are appropriate to maturity and
that are indeed the specific marks, the outward and visible signs, of
the inward and spiritual grace of maturity. And now we are in a position
to observe that the establishment of these views and the direction of
these demands is what is traditionally meant, and what we citizens of
the republic of letters now mean, by the word "education"; and the
constant aim at inculcation of these views and demands is what we know
under the name of the Great Tradition of our republic.

"The popular idea of democracy resents the thought of an elite — the
thought that there are practicable ranges of intellectual and spiritual
experience, achievement and enjoyment, which by nature are open to some
and not to all."

An educational system was set up in our country, and lavishly endowed in
response to the noble sentiment of parents for the advancement of their
children. It was to be equalitarian, as the average man understood
equality; that is to say, everybody should be regarded as able to take
in its benefits. It should be democratic, as the average man understood
democracy; that is to say, no one had any natural right to anything that
everybody could not get. Very well, then, we said, education,
traditionally, is the establishment of certain views of life and the
direction of certain demands on life, views and demands which take
proper account of the fundamental instincts of mankind, all in due
measure and balance; the instinct of workmanship, the instinct of
intellect and knowledge, of religion and morals, of beauty and poetry,
of social life and manners. The aim at an inculcation of these views and
demands is the Great Tradition of a truly civilized society. The
traditional discipline, the process which has been found most competent
to the purpose, is that chiefly of scrutinizing the longest available
continuous record of what the human mind has hitherto done with those
instincts; what it has made out of them; what its successes and failures
have been; and what is to be learned from both. Bring on your children,
and we will put them through this process under the sanction of an
equalitarian and democratic theory.

It did not work. We discovered almost at once that it did not work, and
that apparently there was no way of making it work. The reason it did
not work was that this process postulated an educable person, and
everybody is not educable. Far from it, we discovered that relatively
very few are educable, very few indeed. There became evident an
irreconcilable disagreement between our equalitarian theory and the fact
of experience. Our theory assumed that all persons are educable; our
practical application of it simply showed that the Creator, in His
wisdom and in His loving kindness, had for some unsearchable reason not
quite seen His way to fall in with our theory, for He had not made all
persons educable. We found to our discomfiture that the vast majority of
mankind have neither the force of intellect to apprehend the processes
of education, nor the force of character to make an educational
discipline prevail in their lives.

Thus we were faced with a serious dilemma. On the one side was our
equalitarian theory, with all the power of a strong sentiment behind it,
pushing it on into the test of practice. On the other side was the fact
that an inscrutable Providence had most signally failed to do its part
towards enabling our theory to stand this test. We had, then, the choice
of revising our theory, or of letting it stand and sophisticating our
practice into some sort of correspondence with it. If we let go of the
equalitarian idea in our theory, the democratic idea would disappear
with it; for if all persons are not educable, then some persons may
pretend to a distinction to which all others may not pretend, whereby
education becomes a kind of class prerogative; and this is undemocratic.

We made our choice, leaving our theory unrevised and unexamined; it
remains today the theory upon which our system undertakes to operate. I
repeat for the sake of emphasis, that as far as I know, this theory has
never been formally brought before the bar of letters for examination
and critical judgment. Then, having made our choice, we set out at once
on the business of overhauling, recasting, readjusting, and tinkering
the mechanics of our system; and this has gone on without cessation for
thirty-five years, and so energetically as to degenerate at last into a
mere panicky license of innovation. Plan after plan, method after
method, program after program has been hailed and touted as the one
thing needful, put into effect, carried on for a while, and then become
outmoded in favor of some other; our shores are strewn with their
wreckage — *Quae regio in tern's nostri non plena laboris?*

VII - Training, Diluted Science, and Big Numbers
------------------------------------------------

In the course of this procedure there came to pass the complete
obliteration of a most important distinction which several writers have
of late tried to revive, myself among them — I dealt with it in a brief
essay published three years ago — the distinction between training and
education. As we have observed, very few people are educable. The great
majority remain, we may say, in respect of mind and spirit, structurally
immature; therefore no amount of exposure to the force of any kind of
instruction or example can ever determine in them the views of life or
establish in them the demands on life that are characteristic of
maturity. You may recall the findings of the army tests; they created
considerable comment when they were published. I dare say these tests
are rough and superficial, but under any discount you think proper, the
results in this case are significant. I do not remember the exact
figures, but they are unimportant; the tests showed that an enormous
number of persons of military age had no hope of ever getting beyond the
average fourteen-year-old stage of development. When we consider what
that average is, we are quite free to say that the vast majority of
mankind cannot possibly be educated. They can, however, be trained;
anybody can be trained. Practically any kind of mentality is capable of
making some kind of response to some kind of training; and here was the
salvation of our system's theory. If all hands would simply agree to
call training education, to regard a trained person as an educated
person and a training school as an educational institution, we need not
trouble ourselves about our theory; it was safe. Since everybody is
trainable, the equalitarian side of our theory was safe. Since training
in anything for anybody is a mere matter of money, equipment, and
specific instruction, the democratic side of our theory was safe. Since
a trained citizenry is equivalent to an educated citizenry, the
patriotic aspect of our theory might have as much made of it as ever.
Since, finally, opportunities for every conceivable kind of training
might become abundant and cheap, in innumerable cases to be enjoyed for
nothing, or nearly nothing, the parental sentiment in behalf of
posterity was satisfied.

What we did, then, actually, was to make just this identification of
training with education, and to reconstruct our system accordingly; and
this was the revolution of thirty-five years ago. I do not say that at
every step we were fully conscious of what we were doing, or of its
implications and probable consequences; we proceeded, rather, as most
revolutionists do, by a series of improvisations. We have been
proceeding in that way ever since, and this too is characteristic of
periods of attempted consolidation after a revolution. But that is what
we actually did. The revolutionary principle was the identification of
training with education; the revolutionary process was the summary
sweeping away of the discipline set by the Great Tradition, and the
construction of another procedure to replace it.

"Another matter is worth our notice as bearing upon this situation; that
is, the curious popular veneration for mere size and numbers."

It may be remarked here that with the disappearance of the distinction
between training and education, another distinction of great importance
also disappeared, necessarily disappeared. I refer to the distinction
between formative knowledge and instrumental knowledge. The discipline
set by the Great Tradition concerned itself exclusively with formative
knowledge. To justify replacing this discipline with another procedure
which concerned itself chiefly with instrumental knowledge, as the
procedure of training must obviously do, it became convenient to
maintain that the distinction between these two orders of knowledge was
quite artificial, that instrumental studies were in themselves
formative, as much so as any, and altogether to be preferred on this
account as well as on all others. Nothing worth having was to be gained
by the intensive study of Greek and Roman literature, classical history,
mathematics and formal logic, that could not be gained to better purpose
by the study, say, of modern languages, English, and the sciences. The
revolutionary spirit had its way so completely that this distinction at
once faded out of sight, and at present, probably, most of the younger
spirits among us are quite unaware that it was ever drawn. As is the
case with all revolutions, great general dissatisfaction put a powerful
weapon in the hands of the revolutionists. The product of our system was
poor, as a rule, and, as again is always the case in such circumstances,
nobody was much interested in getting at the real reasons why it was
poor, but rather to pitch upon the first thing in sight and take it as a
ground of complaint. The great question thus became, What is the use of
sheer mathematics, of sheer Greek and Latin? The question, too, was put
with an animus that precluded anything like reasonable consideration,
because collisions of opinion occurred and people became ruffled. The
fact of the matter was that we had been trying to make a great many
persons bear a discipline that they were distinctly unable to bear; the
discipline was appropriate only to educable persons, and they were
ineducable. Our educational theory required us to attempt this
impossibility, and the results were what might be expected even if we
had been administering that discipline to the best advantage, which for
reasons that I have already cited, we were not always able to do. But
all this did not count. Dissatisfaction pitched upon the first thing in
sight, the discipline itself, declared it worthless and insisted on its
being done away.

In making up a procedure to replace the discipline of the Great
Tradition, we were accidentally affected by certain social phenomena
appearing at this time, which struck us with all the force of novelty.
One was the general preoccupation with natural science, brought about by
an unprecedented irruption of invention and discovery. Science touched
the popular sense of awe and wonder. In a memorable conflict with many
of the dogmatic constructions of organized Christianity, it had come off
easily first best; and this had immense popular significance, such
significance as is hard for us now even to imagine. Men's minds were
full of the marvels of science; their imaginations were busy with its
alluring prospect of further marvels. Here, then, was something out of
which to construct a procedure. Children should not grow up ignorant of
these matters, they should be taught "something about" the natural
sciences. This idea was plausible, none could have been more so, and
considering the great general preoccupation with the wonders of
invention and discovery, none could have been more acceptable.

Accepted it accordingly was, and our institutions began at once to deal
in dilutions of various sciences. Our secondary schools and colleges
began to deal in diluted chemistry, diluted botany, diluted biology, and
so on; the sum coming to a quite impressive list. Now, the point worth
remarking here is that this fell in extremely well with the conditions
imposed by our theory, because everybody can do anything with these
dilutions of science that anybody can do, and nobody can get anything
more out of them than everybody can get. Regarded as educational
pursuits, they thus amply satisfy the requirements of an equalitarian
and democratic theory. They do so because they rest wholly upon evidence
of the senses. I do not say that all science rests upon evidence of the
senses — there is no need to raise that point — but only that these
dilutions do, and that therefore they are accessible to an extremely low
order of intelligence, and are easily taught. This feature of our
curricula is that upon which Matthew Arnold showered such exquisite
raillery in his description of the Lycurgus House Academy and its
guiding spirit, Archimedes Silverpump, Ph.D.; and in the summary of the
Lycurgus House curriculum as drawn up by the hand of Silverpump's old
pupil, Mr. Bottles. In that half-page you will miss hardly a single
stock phrase of the eager innovator of yesterday; and probably no better
criticism on the worth of his endeavors was ever formulated than the one
that is implicit in the words of Mr. Bottles:

> "That will do for land and the Church," said Arminius. "And now let us
> hear about commerce." "You mean how was Bottles educated?" answered I.
> "Here we get into another line altogether, but a very good line in its
> way, too. Mr. Bottles was brought up at the Lycurgus House Academy,
> Peckham. You are not to suppose from the name of Lycurgus that any
> Latin and Greek was taught in the establishment; the name only
> indicates the moral discipline and the strenuous earnest character
> imparted there. As to the instruction, the thoughtful educator who was
> principal of the Lycurgus House Academy — Archimedes Silverpump,
> Ph.D., you must have heard of him in Germany — had modern views. 'We
> must be men of our age,' he used to say. 'Useful knowledge, living
> languages, and the forming of the mind through observation and
> experiment, these are the fundamental articles of my educational
> creed.' Or, as I have heard his pupil Bottles put it in his expansive
> moments after dinner (Bottles used to ask me to dinner till that
> affair of yours with him in the Reigate train): 'Original man,
> Silverpump! fine mind! fine system! None of your antiquated rubbish —
> all practical work — latest discoveries in science — mind kept
> constantly excited — lots of interesting experiments — lights of all
> colours — fizz! fizz! bang! bang! That's what I call forming a man!'"

Interest in vocationalism also affected the content of our new
procedure. The teaching of science answered the innovator's demand that
our system should be modern and up to date, that we should be "men of
our time." Vocationalism answered his demand that education should be "a
preparation for life." These two demands were the revolution's main
fulcrum for ousting the earlier discipline. It was easy to say that the
earlier discipline is medieval and out of relation to modern life, for
in a sense that is true; but it is true in a sense easily misunderstood
and distorted. It was easy to say that this discipline sends out its
votaries quite unprepared to meet the actual conditions of present-day
living, for that also is true in a sense; it did not send them out with
any direct, specific preparation for getting anything or for doing
anything. This it never did, never pretended to do. A general
preparation it did give an educable person, first by inculcating habits
of orderly, profound and disinterested thought; and second, by giving
him an immense amount of experienced acquaintance with the way the human
mind had worked in all departments of its activity. But this benefit,
besides being communicable only to a few, could easily be made to seem
vague and illusory in competition with those held out by a program of
vocationalism. Moreover, the economic circumstances of the country threw
a halo of great seriousness around vocationalism's program. With the
closing of the frontier in 1890 and the subsequent centralization of
economic control, the opportunities for individual initiative rapidly
dwindled. The stratification of our society into a small owning and
exploiting class and a propertyless laboring class became more clearly
apparent than ever before, and this gave rise to a sense that time was
pressing. It was borne in upon our public that if a person wished to get
on in the world, he had to hurry up about it. Not only were his chances
of getting into the owning and exploiting class becoming few and small,
but his prospective hold on even a middle-class position was becoming
most uncertain; and on the other hand, the likelihood of his sinking
into the exploited and propertyless laboring class was increasing at an
alarming rate. He had no time for more than a vocational training. The
ensuing mass movement towards our technical and vocational schools and
the vocational departments of our universities confirmed us in our
theory, and set us to work even harder at making our general system
correspond as closely to our theory as ever we could. Our institutions
became more than ever equalitarian in the popular sense, more than ever
democratic; more faithfully than ever did they try "to give the people
what they want." The result is seen in the impressive nationwide exhibit
of what Mr. Flexner calls "bargain-counter education" that is spread
before us at the present time, not only by our universities, which were
the special subject of Mr. Flexner's examination, but by our secondary
schools, which were the subject of Mr. Learned's examination, and by our
colleges.

Another matter is worth our notice as bearing upon this situation; that
is, the curious popular veneration for mere size and numbers, and the
resulting persuasion that bigness is the same thing as greatness. The
United States has made itself known as the land where "big things are
done in a big way," and has not much troubled itself, as a rule, by the
question of whether they were always worth doing. The sanction of
bigness was sufficient. By force of this persuasion, a big school is a
great school. The first question asked about an educational institution
is, How many students has it? Here we see our theory again emerging. An
institution pretending really to educate people who are really educable
would have relatively few students, not only because there are
relatively few educable persons, but because of what is known in
economics as the law of diminishing returns. If it had a relatively
large number of students, the fact would in itself be enough to raise
the suspicion that it was not doing its work well. The presence of large
numbers is in the nature of things a pretty fair measure of an
institution's equalitarian and democratic character, in the popular
sense of those terms, and of its concern with "bargain-counter
education," which with equal justice and perhaps no less elegance, Mr.
Flexner might have styled grab-bag education.

In one of Mr. Hoover's campaign speeches, according to the newspapers,
he congratulated the country on having ten times as many students as any
other country, in what he called "its institutions of higher learning."
His congratulations were accepted without thought or question; their
hollowness was not exposed, so far as I know, by a single editorial
article; even the opposition newspapers said nothing about it. Probably
campaign speeches are not taken very seriously; we have learned to judge
them rather by their sound than by their sense. Yet my impression is
that this incident tends somewhat to show how devoutly incurious our
public is about its fetish of size and number. Otherwise surely it would
have occurred to someone to say, "But this may not be at all a matter
for congratulation. Perhaps it is quite the opposite. In itself, the
fact of our having so large an institutional population means nothing
either way. Everything surely depends on what the students are like, and
what the institutions are like, and what the students do in the
institutions, and what sort of folk they are when they come out. Tell us
about these matters, and then we will say whether we are to be
congratulated or not." Quite possibly indeed, for anything that Mr.
Hoover's speech implied to the contrary, the other nations may be the
ones to be congratulated, not ourselves. Mr. Hoover was, in short,
making an interested appeal to an undiscriminating and irrational
popular sentiment of veneration for sheer size, sheer number; and this
is claptrap.

VIII - Drugstore Education
--------------------------

We may now take a rapid glance at the actual state of things which all
these influences have combined to bring about. The procedure in the
secondary school is perhaps sufficiently open to common observation so
that we need say nothing about it here, leaving it for a remark or two
later on some special point. Let us speak of the university and the
undergraduate college. Traditionally, the university was an association
of scholars, grouped in four faculties: Literature, Law, Theology, and
Medicine. When I say an association of scholars, I mean that it was not
quite precisely what we understand by a teaching institution. The
interest of the students was not the first interest of the institution.
Putting it roughly, the scholars were busy about their own affairs, but
because the Great Tradition had to be carried on from generation to
generation, they allowed certain youngsters to hang about and pick up
what they could; they lectured every now and then, and otherwise gave
the students a lift when and as they thought fit.

"One cannot help remarking points of resemblance here between the newest
type of institutional organization and the newest type of drugstore."

The point is that the whole burden of education lay on the student, not
on the institution or on the individual scholar. Traditionally, also,
the undergraduate college put the whole burden of education on the
student. The curriculum was fixed, he might take it or leave it; but if
he wished to proceed to a bachelor of arts, he had to complete it
satisfactorily. Moreover, he had to complete it pretty well on his own;
there was no pressure of any kind upon an instructor to get him through
it, or to assume any responsibility whatever for his progress, or to
supply any adventitious interest in his pursuits. The instructor usually
did make himself reasonably helpful, especially in the case of those
whom he regarded as promising, but it was no part of the institution's
intention or purpose that he should transfer any of the actual burden of
education from the student's shoulders to his own, or contribute
anything from his own fund of interest in his subject by way of making
up for any deficiency of interest on the part of the student. I ask you,
with your permission, to remark this point particularly.

In speaking now of the present-day university, I shall cite the one of
which I am a very humble and unconsidered member. I do this not because
of its prominence, or because I can so conveniently lift some references
to it from Mr. Flexner's recent book, and thus save trouble. I do it
because one may always, as a matter of good taste, use oneself or one's
own for purposes of illustration in cases where by any chance that kind
of service might be thought disagreeable. To begin with, then, we have
Mr. Butler the other day expounding, and in extremely fine rhetoric
attempting to justify, what he calls "the newest type of university
organization and influence." Well, of course, if one wishes to call that
type of organization a university organization, one may do so; and if
one can induce others to regard it as a university organization, one may
also do that. It must be pointed out, however, that in so doing one acts
very arbitrarily, even violently. This type of organization is not a
development, but something entirely different from the traditional type
of university organization; it is entirely different in structure,
entirely different in intention, entirely different in function. In
structure, the four "learned" faculties have been superseded by all
manner of "departments" and "schools." In intention, the newest type of
university organization and influence is not primarily that of an
association of scholars, but that of an association, more or less loose
and sprawling, of pedagogues, of persons on whom, as we shall shortly
see, the whole burden of education has been shifted. In function, this
type does not contemplate education, in the traditional sense of the
word; it contemplates training. In fact, of all our institutions, the
university gives perhaps the most conspicuous example of the complete
working out of our general theory; it is perhaps the most conspicuous
example of what a popular doctrine of equalitarianism and democracy
comes to in practice.

The undergraduate college, however, is in this respect no great way
behind the university. It has degenerated into a curiously anomalous
affair, exhibiting changes in structure, intention and function, which
correspond to those exhibited by the university. Its repertory — one is
rather put to it to find a name for its schedule of organized pursuits —
at one end reaches back far into the secondary school, and at the other
reaches forward into the technical and vocational schools, while at the
middle, apparently by way of lagniappe, but actually for reasons that we
shall look into a little later, it carries on some kind of formal
dealings with literature, chiefly English. I never think of an
undergraduate college without being reminded of a story which I heard
you, Mr. President,[[2]](#note2) tell in public twenty years ago, the
story of an overassiduous mother who insisted on her boy's eating some
asparagus, on the notion that it was good for him. When asked how he
liked it, he said mournfully that it tasted raw at one end and rotten at
the other.

In support of this view of the modern undergraduate college, I may cite
some observations made by Mr. Flexner. At Columbia College (which is an
undergraduate college controlled by Columbia University) a student may
complete the requirements for a bachelor's degree by including in his
course of study such matters as the principles of advertising; the
writing of advertising copy; advertising layouts; advertising research;
practical poultry raising; business English; elementary stenography;
newspaper practice; reporting and copy editing; feature writing; book
reviewing; wrestling and self-defence. By availing himself of some sort
of traffic arrangement with a sister institution belonging to Columbia,
he may also count as leading to a degree, courses in the fundamental
processes of cookery; fundamental problems in clothing; clothing
decoration; family meals; food etiquette and hospitality; principles of
home laundering; social life of the home; gymnastics and dancing for
men, including practice in clog dancing; instruction, elementary or
advanced, in school orchestras and bands.

Without the least wish to be flippant, one cannot help remarking points
of resemblance here between the newest type of institutional
organization and the newest type of drugstore. Perhaps the term
"drugstore education" is even more closely descriptive than either Mr.
Flexner's "bargain-counter education" or the term "grab-bag education,"
which I proposed a moment ago, for one goes to drugstores nowadays for
nearly everything but drugs.

Really, this type is so new and so startling that no ready-made term
fits it very well. But if one is thus somewhat at a loss in surveying
the comprehensive prospectus of Columbia College, one simply throws up
one's hands and capitulates before the advertised program of another
smaller undergraduate institution which, according to an announcement in
the press, proposes to make up a special curriculum, for each student,
apparently a sort of hand-tailored affair, adapted to individual
intentions, aptitudes, and deficiencies. This strikes me as more than a
counsel of despair; it is a counsel of desperation. Yet really, the only
thing that differentiates this college from many other colleges, in this
respect, is that it has the commendable forthrightness to say plainly
what it means to do.

IX - The Great Tradition
------------------------

Yet, bearing in mind the terms of our general theory, one perceives at
once that no other line of institutional development is practicable or
possible, and one is therefore free from any imputation of ill nature in
remarking the kind of development that has actually taken place. Given
the conditions of our theory, we have seen that our system is precisely
such as one would expect; and we now see that our institutions are
precisely such as one would expect. They cannot help themselves; their
organizers and administrators cannot help themselves. So long as they
choose to remain organizers or administrators, they must organize or
administer under the prescription of an impossible and fantastic
conception of equality, an impossible and fantastic conception of
democracy; and the upshot of their efforts must be precisely such a
system as we have, precisely such institutions as we have.

There is an alternative, of course, but it is one that suggests itself
at once and needs no comment; it is rather exorbitant to expect them to
take it, and in the long run, probably, matters would be not much
improved by their doing so. The most that can be expected, and also the
least, is that they should be perfectly clear in their own minds about
what they are doing, and never for a single moment persuade themselves
that it is what it is not, or attempt to extenuate it or justify
themselves in it on the strength of any such persuasion. In the realm of
morals, I suspect that what one does is of much less importance than a
failure in intellectual integrity concerning the nature of what one
does. I have no need to remind you that the responsibility for
continuous exercise of an absolutely spotless intellectual integrity
rests most heavily upon those who pretend to be continuators of the
Great Tradition. It is of the essence of the Great Tradition that the
disinterestedness and objectivity implied in Plato's phrase should,
first and last and most inflexibly, be maintained upon ourselves, our
interests and desires, above all upon our ambitions and achievements.
Let these be what they may; possibly better this than that, possibly
finer, nobler, more in character with our pretensions as disciples of
the Great Tradition, children of light — all that is for us to weigh and
judge — but the important thing is that we should invariably see them as
they are.

"The newest type of university organization," then, we perceive to be
essentially the same as the newest type of college organization; and
examination of our secondary-school organization will show that also as
essentially the same. Our institutional pattern runs the same throughout
our system. Our institutions organize the identification of training
with education; they organize the disregard of disciplinary processes
and formative knowledge. They organize, precisely as M. Renan said, "a
considerable popular instruction without any serious higher education."
Under the influence of vocationalism and the fetish worship of size and
numbers, they have stuffed out the content of this popular instruction
to an incredible volume. No institution could afford to be behind its
neighbors in this; all alike had to have a hand in it, for such as did
not would go to the wall. It is fair, I think, to say that our
institutions have conducted among themselves a grand competition for
numbers, on ruinous terms; first, by shifting the burden of education
from the student to the instructor, and putting pressure on the
instructor to let his students go through as lightly and quickly as
possible; and second, by offering a choice among an immense number of
subjects that are easily taught, and easily accessible to a very low
order of mind.

In this connection I have already mentioned the dilutions of various
sciences. Looking over the list of subjects which Mr. Flexner cites as
available to candidates for Columbia College's baccalaureate, you will
acknowledge, I think, that the difficulties they present are chiefly
mechanical. Research in cookery, for instance, home laundering,
wrestling, are subjects not beyond comprehension by the average
intellect, though a certain mechanical unhandiness might hold one back
from proficiency in them. With these we may class, for our purposes, two
pursuits that the newest type of institutional organization does a great
deal with; that is to say, modern languages and what is known as
"courses in English." With regard to modern languages, we must make a
discrimination that is perhaps seldom observed. A use, say, of Italian
or French as a literary language, giving us full command of a great
literature in addition to our own — this is one thing. A use which aims
at conversation, or as Matthew Arnold said, enables us to fight the
battle of life with the waiters in foreign hotels — this is quite
another thing. It is the latter use which is in vogue in our
institutions, because it is more easily taught and more easily
appropriated.

I was lately shown a dormitory in an undergraduate college, and was told
that people spoke only French in that house, no other language being
permitted. This did not interest me. I asked what they said when they
spoke French, this being the only thing that counts, for one may chatter
nonsense and inanities in French as well as in any other language, I
suppose. I got no satisfaction on this point; yet it is most important.
The one use of French may be arrived at through the other, no question;
yet a quite complete possession of the second use is no guarantee that
the other will be attained, and experience shows that it seldom is
attained. The best linguists we know, using the word in our
institutional sense, are persons who are intellectually quite
incompetent to apply their proficiency to even the most rudimentary
literary purposes. We all have seen commissionaires in Marseilles who
speak half a dozen languages faultlessly, yet have no literary use of
any of them and no power of acquiring such use. On the other hand, we
know persons who speak French, say, most execrably, yet who know the
history and structure of the language as few Frenchmen know it, and are
as much at home in the archaic French of the fifteenth century — French
that not one in a hundred Frenchmen can read — as they are in the French
of the Academy, or of the Paris morning newspaper. Mr. Jefferson, you no
doubt remember, never attempted to speak any language but English,
except under great pressure; yet he had full command of the Italian and
French literatures.

With regard to "courses in English," I suspect that if you have not
already done some such thing, there is a surprise in store for you when
you make an estimate of the number of them that our institutions offer
annually. I suggest that you look into the matter, and meanwhile I shall
not anticipate your findings, being desirous that they should make their
own impression on you and carry their own intimations. I therefore say
only that there are a great many such courses, whereas forty years ago
no such thing was known. Why should this be so? Forty years ago, our
English-speaking students learned English quite informally; it was our
own tongue, we were bred to a native idiomatic use of it, such a use as
none but a native can ever possibly acquire. To say that English was not
taught in our higher institutions means merely that everybody taught it.
No matter what the stated subject under discussion might be, if we
expressed ourselves inaccurately, loosely, unidiomatically, we heard
about it at once and on the spot, and in terms that forcibly suggested a
greater carefulness in the future.

As for English literature, it was our literature, our concern with it
was proprietary, everything in it was open to us, and the critical
judgment, the standards of taste and discrimination that we applied to
it, were such as had been bred in us by our long acquaintance with the
literatures of Greece and Rome. No one dreamed of teaching English
literature; indeed, I do not see how it can be effectively taught in any
formal fashion, how a really competent acquaintance with it can be
brought about in any other way than the way by which it was brought
about in us.

Why, then, is it that "courses in English" should hold so large a place
in the newest type of institutional organization? They do so. for a very
simple reason. Under the conditions that we have been describing, great
masses of ineducable people come into our institutions. They must be
kept there, and must nominally be busy with something or other as a *pro
forma* justification for keeping them. Therefore something has to be
found for them, to do that they can do, and this is a hard matter
because they can do almost nothing. One thing they can do, albeit after
a very poor fashion, is to read; that is to say, they can make their way
more or less uncertainly down a printed page; and therefore "courses in
English" have come into their present extraordinary vogue. Well, here is
a small garland of windflowers culled by an instructor from the work,
not of primary-school children, but of university students, chiefly
upperclassmen, who were busy with "courses in English":

> "Being a tough hunk of meat, I passed up the steak."
>
> "Lincoln's mind growed as his country kneaded it."
>
> "The camel carries a water tank with him; he is also a rough rider and
> has four gates."
>
> "As soon as music starts silence rains, but as soon as it stops it get
> worse than ever."
>
> "College students, as a general rule, like such readings that will
> take the least mental inertia."
>
> "Modern dress is extreme and ought to be checked."
>
> "Although the Irish are usually content with small jobs they have won
> a niche in the backbone of the country."

The instructor who reported these efforts went on to show how
Shakespeare fared at the hands of their authors:

> Edmund in King Lear "committed a base act and allowed his illegitimate
> father to see a forged letter."
>
> Cordelia's death "was the straw that broke the camel's back and killed
> the king."
>
> Lear's fool "was prostrated on the neck of the king."
>
> "Hotspur," averred a sophomore, "was a wild, irresolute man. He loved
> honor above all. He would go out and kill twenty Scotchmen before
> breakfast."
>
> Kate was "a woman who had something to do with hot spurs."

Also Milton:

> "Diabetes was Milton's Italian friend," one student explained.
>
> Another said: "Satan had all the emotions of a woman and was a sort of
> trustee in heaven, so to speak."
>
> The theme of Comus was given as "purity protestriate."
>
> Mammon in *Paradise Lost* suggests that the best way "to endure hell
> is to raise hell and build a pavilion."

The newest type of institutional organization has obliterated the lines
that formerly marked off the units of our system and bounded their
respective bailiwicks. Each unit is doing a little of everything, a
little secondary-school work, a little college work, a little vocational
work, and what not. Certain new units also have been knaved up out of
this hodgepodge to do likewise a little of everything; the "junior
college," for example.

Some years ago I visited an old acquaintance in the Middle West, who was
teaching English in a huge swollen institution that went by the name of
a state university. I looked in on one of my friend's classes in
"English composition," and found him engaged on a kind of thing that by
the very handsomest concession was only eighth-grade work; and his
students were dealing with it in a manner that an educable eighth-grade
pupil would regard as disgraceful. These students were not eighth-grade
pupils; they were adult persons, ranking *bona fide* as part of a
university population, and eligible for a degree authorized by a
university.

The outcome of our theory in this particular may be clearly seen by
another reference to the undergraduate college, as occupying a middle
ground among our institutions. Not long ago I visited an undergraduate
college — not one of those connected with Columbia University — and on
casually looking into matters there, I told the president that I was
surprised to see the college doing so much work that belonged far back
in the grade school. He said it was unfortunate, but it could not be
helped; students came there with these holes in their preparation that
had to be filled up. I observed that the undergraduate college was
perhaps hardly in a position to afford these diversions from its proper
business, and that it seemed likely to suffer from them. "Yes," he said,
"but don't you think we ought to do something for these poor fellows who
come to us so imperfectly prepared?"

"Certainly I do," I said. "Fire them."

"Ah, yes," he replied, "but then, you see, we should not have any
students and would have to shut up shop."

I hinted as delicately as I could that this might not be in the long run
an absolute misfortune; as I remember, I may have quoted Homer's
pertinent line on the death of Patroclus. He admitted the force of this,
but said, "We are doing a poor job, I know, but we are doing something
as best we can, and I think a little better than most institutions of
our kind; so we hope it is worthwhile."

At the other end of the line, this college was doing quite a thriving
business in preprofessional and prevocational training. Having asked
about this, I was told that the lads were in a hurry to get on with
their vocations and did not feel like spending time on any work that had
not a direct vocational bearing; if such work were insisted on, they
would simply leave, and go to some other place where the requirements
were more generous. Here you may quite see what it is that obliterates
the lines between the units of our system, and also where the
responsibility for that obliteration and its consequences really lies.
If you will permit the expression, the college passes the buck to the
secondary school; and there is a measure of justice in that. The school,
also with a measure of justice, replies, "If you are not satisfied with
the way these men are prepared, why do you admit them? We cannot
consider your requirements alone; we have very many diverse demands made
on us, and must do the best we can to meet all of them." The vocational
or technical school, the office or the factory — postcollegiate
conditions generally — say to the college, "We cannot altogether
accommodate ourselves to your ideas; if these young men are in such a
pucker to get on in the world, it is your business to start them right,
according to the conditions that actually exist"; and there is a measure
of justice in that, too. Responsibility, clearly, lies nowhere in the
order of our institutions; it runs back to the acceptance of an
erroneous theory. All this ludicrous state of things that we have been
examining is the inevitable result of trying to translate a bad theory
into good practice.

Certain other aspects of this state of things are worth a moment's
notice, in order that we may see how directly they come about in
consequence of the attempt to turn bad theory into good practice.
Granted our theory, they could be forecast and postulated as inevitable.
A system constructed on this theory must comprise an immense amount of
machinery, and as we have seen, so long as the theory is kept to, this
machinery will be incessantly multiplied, overhauled and tinkered in the
vain hope of making it work better than it can. Thus our system invites,
nay, we may almost say commands, the interest of persons whose approach
to it is most undesirable; the careerist, adventurer, quidnunc,
hand-over-head experimenter, publicity getter, profiteer, and quack. It
is not to our purpose to inquire how far the administration of our
system is actually in the hands of gentry such as these; we merely
remark the fact, about which there can be no doubt, that a system
erected on our theory is most freely and conspicuously liable to their
incursions. Moreover, it is notorious that a period of attempted
consolidation after a revolution always opens the way for the ascendency
of elements that are in every respect objectionable; and hence on both
these grounds our system occupies an extremely vulnerable position.

Then, too, the erection and operation of this vast amount of machinery
has tended quite strictly to formalize its administration; and this in
turn has tended to the disappearance of individuals whose gifts,
abilities, and distinctions were not of the order prescribed by a
rigidly formalized routine, but were nevertheless very useful. You are
aware, of course, that the older type of institutional organization made
a great place for such individuals. In the Middle Ages, the association
of educable persons with them, and the exposure to the spiritual
influences that they generated, pretty well made up all there was to
education. Here or there would emerge some great man, like [Peter
Abelard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Abelard), [John of
Scotland](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duns_Scotus), [Bernard of
Clairvaux](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernard_of_Clairvaux), and
aspiring youngsters out of all peoples, nations, and languages would lay
down the shovel and the hoe, pack up some provisions, tramp off and find
them, camp down with them and pick up what they had to give; then tramp
off to the next man whom they had heard of as mounting pretty heavy
guns, and then the next. If you have not done so, I venture to suggest
that you read Miss [Helen
Waddell](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helen_Waddell)'s scholarly,
unpretentious, and exquisitely sympathetic little book on the Vagantesy
of the [wandering students of the Middle
Ages](http://books.google.com/books?id=K8YJZQuQxgkC). Do not be afraid
of it; I am not trying to make medievalists of you; you may read and
enjoy it and still remain "men of your time." I merely suggest that the
view of another type of educational routine, albeit one that our system
disallows, is interesting.

Some vestiges of this routine survived well into our own time. You will
notice that nowadays a person always says, I am a graduate of Virginia,
or of Columbia, or of Harvard, and lets it go at that. I myself can
remember when one seldom heard a person speak so. I can distinctly
remember a time when the regular way, the natural and instinctive way,
to put it, was, I studied under Mr. Humphreys, or Mr. John B. Minor, or
Mr. Gildersleeve, or Mr. Frank Smith, at the University of Virginia. The
man was instinctively brought first to mind, and put in the place of
honor, and in honoring the man one honored the institution that
maintained him. Precisely so in the first half of the sixteenth century,
you find one of Rabelais's characters saying, "When I was a law student
at Poitiers under Brocardium Juris" this being a student's nickname for
one of the law-professors at the University of Poitiers, possibly Robert
Irland, or Ireland, a Scotsman who taught law there for fifty years, and
did much to make the faculty of law at Poitiers one of the most
distinguished in all Europe. Rabelais also has Panurge make a playful
reference to some readings under "the most decretalipotent Scotch
doctor" at Poitiers, which this time almost certainly points to Robert
Irland. He also has Pantagruel going the customary round of the French
universities, as Rabelais himself may have done, judging by the casual
record of his acquaintance with distinguished men connected with some of
them: Boyssonne at Toulouse, Schyron and Rondellet at Montpellier, and
so on. The point is that all these men were (if I may put it so without
offense; I certainly mean none) distinguished for something that lies
outside the scope of a pedagogy established on trade-unionist
principles. In our own country, many years ago, when the Great Tradition
was respected among us, and its discipline as well as possible
maintained, the authorities at Harvard thought it worthwhile to keep
Oliver Wendell Holmes demonstrating anatomy, Longfellow teaching (I
think) Spanish, and James Russell Lowell teaching Romance languages.
Technically, I dare say there were better men available for these
specialties, and certainly in the trade-unionist sense, Holmes,
Longfellow, and Lowell had no qualifications worth speaking of. But they
were completely and conspicuously in the Great Tradition, they were
children of light. All their works and ways had the mark of the Great
Tradition upon them, not the mark of
[Dagon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dagon). Therefore any mode of
association with them, whether over Spanish, or anatomy, or what you
will, continually liberated the Great Tradition's influence, spread the
contagion of its charm, and powerfully recommended its discipline; and
this, in the view of the older type of institutional organization, made
them abundantly worth their keep.

As evidence tending to show the difference between this view and the
view of the newer type of organization, I may mention a recent
experience of my own with one of the best philologists in the country.
Somewhere in his sphere of influence there had turned up a boy who in
earlier days would have passed muster as a good promising student,
nothing to get excited about, but who now was to be regarded as
something of a prodigy in Greek and Latin studies. He had got about all
he could get where he was, and the question was what to do with him. Did
I know of any outstanding man in any institution anywhere in America,
with whom he could be put; any man who was at all notably a continuator
of the Great Tradition? My interlocutor, a man of my own age, and I
looked at each other in silence for about twenty minutes while we
overhauled all the resources of our memory, and then had to give up. We
could think offhand of excellent technicians, well-trained reporters,
and all that sort of thing, but that was as far as we could go. We then
remarked the strangeness of the fact — for it did seem strange when
looked at in retrospect from the present state of things — that thirty
years ago we could have rattled you off the names of a dozen or more in
a moment, as fast as our tongues could run.

Another interesting feature of this present condition of affairs is the
complete disappearance of what may be called the nonprofessional
scholar, such as foreign countries have always produced, and still
produce, and of which we ourselves formerly produced a few, some of them
quite notable. One of the best Latinists in England of the last
generation was a bishop; one of the very best Greek scholars in England
was the head of the huge Westminster Bank. Some of England's public men
of the period, like Mr. Asquith and Mr. Gladstone, were good scholars.
Even now, among France's public men, M. Poincaré is an excellent man of
letters. At the height of the war, M. Poincaré, representing the French
Academy at the centenary of Ernest Renan, wrote an appreciation of
Renan's position in the world of letters that was redolent of good sound
literary learning and taste; and M. Barthou did as much in his capacity
as representing the Institute of Science on the same occasion. In our
own country, the revision of our standard Latin lexicon was made almost
entirely by a man in the insurance business. The history of the
Inquisition which has held the field undisputed for thirty years was
written by a retired publisher in Philadelphia. A newspaper editor gave
us our best translation of a Greek historian. Bearing our theory in
mind, you will have no trouble about seeing that this sort of thing was
bound to disappear as promptly and completely as it has. With education
supplanted by training, and vocationalism rampant, it could not do
otherwise. One of the most interesting and significant assumptions in
the world is that which you will nowadays encounter everywhere in
American society: if a person shows signs of having an education,
properly so called, the assumption is almost invariably, first, that he
got it in Europe, and second, that he makes his living by it or at least
uses it for purposes of profit. This, I repeat, is most significant. I
am strongly tempted to trace out some of its implications, but what has
been said already will probably make them apparent.

It may be said — indeed, it is often said — that this is an age of
science, and that we have men of science who are as eminent and
influential as those whom we have just cited. If Harvard, for example,
no longer has a Holmes and a Lowell, this means no more than that their
places have been taken by Mr. X., the biologist, and Mr. Y., the
physicist, who are quite as eminent as Holmes and Lowell were, quite as
highly regarded and as much looked up to. While we may freely accept
this statement as it stands, two things are to be noted. First, eminence
in science does not necessarily imply eminence in the Great Tradition,
and eminence in the Great Tradition is what we are talking about. A man
may be most eminent, for instance, in the science of medicine, he may be
the most skillful practitioner living, or the most capable man in
research, or whatever else you will, without bearing anything remotely
resembling the mark of the Great Tradition. One may be ever so eminent
as a physicist, yet with an eminence wholly different from that which
distinguished some physicists of the last generation who notably bore
this mark. We may go further than this. A man may even be most eminent
on the scientific side of the Great Tradition's discipline itself, he
may be thoroughly up on its whole technique, and yet be in no sense a
continuator of the Great Tradition. On the contrary, his views of life
and his demands on life may be such as show conclusively that he is all
abroad in it, quite untouched by its formative power. To say this is no
more than to remark what is a matter of common observation, that an
ineducable person may succeed in training himself in the sheer science
of the Great Tradition's discipline, and remain none the less
ineducable. Not long ago, I remember, I was looking over a volume of
minor Greek verse which on the scientific side was a marvel of editing,
but that was all one could say for it; one laid it down with gratitude
that one had escaped an introduction to Greek literature at the editor's
hands.

Our reply is, then, that we are not interested in eminence except of a
special order. Let us have all the science there is, of course — one can
never have too much — but stark eminence in science does not in the
present instance command our interest. The object of education, as we
understand the word, the purpose of enforcing the Great Tradition's
discipline, is to inculcate certain views of life and certain demands on
life. Hence this object is not to produce, say, great practitioners of
medicine, but (if you will permit me to bring forward some examples by
name) to produce great practitioners like
[Pancoast](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Pancoast) and [William
Osler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Osler). Not to produce great
physicists, but great physicists like [Mr.
Millikan](http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1923/millikan-bio.html).
Not great philologists and grammarians, but those like
[Gildersleeve](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basil_Lanneau_Gildersleeve)
and
[Humphreys](http://www.utexas.edu/faculty/council/2000-2001/memorials/AMR/Humphreys/humphreys.html),
who had all the science there was, but who employed it in all their
works and ways for the furtherance of the Great Tradition, and for that
alone.

The second observation which we must make concerning the eminence of men
of science in our day and country, is one that we may not perhaps care
to dwell on too closely, but undoubtedly we should remind ourselves that
by reason of the rather questionable principles upon which publicity is
organized among us, a person may be eminent and not be conspicuous. His
eminence may be duly acknowledged in all quarters where such
acknowledgement counts for anything, and he may yet remain otherwise
almost unknown. It is only by a certain order of achievement in science
that he becomes conspicuous; that is to say, if he invents or discovers
something that can be popularized, like the telephone, or if he writes
popularly on some subject that touches the curiosity of a large public,
as [Sir James Jeans](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sir_James_Jeans) is
doing, or if, like Mr. Einstein, his pursuits are such as are
exploitable by journalism. One may doubt that the names of
[Dana](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Dwight_Dana),
[Gray](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asa_Gray), and even
[Agassiz](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Agassiz) were as well known
in their day, or are now as well known, as those of
[Morse](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_F._B._Morse) and
[Bell](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Graham_Bell); yet there is
no question about their eminence. In the last generation, this country
produced one of the most eminent men of science in the whole world. His
name was quite unknown among us while he lived, and it is still unknown.
Yet I may say without too great exaggeration that when I heard it
mentioned in a professional assembly in the Netherlands two years ago,
everybody got down under the table and touched their foreheads to the
floor. His name was [Josiah Willard
Gibbs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josiah_Willard_Gibbs).

Now, the object of this observation is not to intimate that spurious or
inflated reputations are easily made among us; whether this be true to
any great extent or not is no concern of ours at the moment. We may
raise the question, however, whether the general interest in science
which as a people we are supposed to have, actually exists. It is taken
for granted, especially by unfriendly critics of the Great Tradition's
discipline, that as a people we are of a scientific turn, and have great
interest in science. I see no reason to believe this. We are greatly
interested in the practical outcome of invention and discovery; that is
clear, and we need not go too far out of our way to attribute a
mercenary motive to this interest. We are also, I think, greatly
possessed of an indolent, passive, and fitful curiosity about certain
superficial and speculative concerns of science, which causes us to skim
their large popular literature with some frail and tenuous semblance of
attention. We are also susceptible to sensation mongering, such as that
which poor Mr. Einstein found so ready to be visited on him when he came
here; a most discreditable and repulsive performance on the part of our
journalists who, as you no doubt remember, drew on the very last
resources of their loathsome profession in the effort to exploit his
superb achievements. But that we have, as for instance the Germans so
notably have, an ingrained regard for science, an instinctive respect
for whatever is *wissenschaftlich*, a sense that there is a right and a
wrong way of doing things, and that the right way is the one to be
followed — this is in my judgment rather more than doubtful, for I
nowhere see evidence of the working of any such spirit. Therefore when
it is assumed that this turn for science has anything to do with a
disparagement of the Great Tradition's discipline, I would suggest that
we examine carefully the premises of this assumption before we accept
it.

X - Sound Theory and a Reasonable Precision in Nomenclature
-----------------------------------------------------------

We are now in a position, probably, to deal with the little problem
which we set ourselves a while ago, and which for convenience we may now
restate. Why is it that our postrevolutionary conditions seem no more
satisfactory than our prerevolutionary conditions? We have done
everything to our system that ingenuity can devise and that money can
pay for; why, then, does it work no better in point of produce than it
ever did? What is the meaning of the general chorus of complaint about
it, and what are the specific bearings, the "indications," as the
physicians say, of surveys like those of Mr. Learned, Mr. Flexner, and
others? Is it not clear that the whole difficulty lies with the theory
upon which we are trying to erect a workable system? Is it not clear
also that so long as we persist with an unsound theory, we never can, by
any exercise of ingenuity, set up a system that will work any better
than ours is now working? I think there can be no doubt about it.

"Is it not clear that the whole difficulty lies with the theory upon
which we are trying to erect a workable system?"

Earlier in these lectures, you may remember, I suggested a comparison
between the product of the Continental university and ours. Compare the
material resources, the "plant" and equipment, of, say, a French
provincial university and one of ours; and then compare the general run
of produce. In this year of depression, sixty-five of our institutions
report themselves as proposing to spend $62,500,000 on building alone.
Looking at a Continental university and at what comes out of it, one may
very seriously ask, What for? By comparison with the "plant" which I see
around me here at the University of Virginia, the great University of
Bonn, which is in the very aristocracy of German universities, looks
like a barrack. What would be the emotions of a really up-to-date,
live-wire, go-getting American university president (I venture to use
these terms because in this particular connection they seem to have
passed out of the glossary of slang and into conventional good usage) if
he were invited to Poitiers or Montpellier and went to take a look
around his new domain? Yet see the produce that comes out of Bonn,
Poitiers, Montpellier, and then see what comes out of ours!

The root of the matter is, I repeat, that the Continental institution
has no false and fantastic conceptions of equality and democracy to
which it must conform, and no inflated notion of the social value of a
literate citizenry. We in the United States hear a great deal about the
"average student," and his capacities, needs, and desires. The
Continental institution feels under no obligation to regard the average
student as a privileged person. He is there on his own, if he be there
at all, and he finds nothing cut to his measure, no organized effort to
make things easy and pleasant for him, no special consideration for his
deficiencies, his infirmity of purpose, or the amount or quality of
intellectual effort that he is capable of making. Equality and democracy
enjoin no such responsibility on these institutions.

In the Prussian schools, modeled on the Crown Patronage Schools, you
will indeed see the shoemaker's son sitting between the banker's son and
the statesman's son, over the same lessons; but equality and democracy,
as we popularly understand them, have nothing to do with this. The three
boys sit there because they are able to do the work, and it matters not
which one of the three, if any, finds it too hard going, and drops out.
The upshot of the Continental system's freedom from unsound notions
about equality and democracy is that its processes are selective; "the
best geniuses," as Mr. Jefferson said, are diligently "raked from the
rubbish," and the rubbish is not suffered to clog the workings of the
system's machinery. Our system, on the contrary, is engaged with the
rubbish, because the theory of its operation requires it to be so
engaged.

Now, since hardly any one is satisfied with the way our system is
working, let us see for a moment what the precise grounds are for
complaint against it. Suppose we had the reorganization and redirection
of it wholly in our hands, just what changes would we make? It may
possibly surprise you a little to hear me say that I would make hardly
any actual changes, and those I would make are only such as should
enable our system to go on doing practically what it is doing now, but
to do it better. Our dissatisfaction, really, is due only to some vague
notion that we ought to be gathering grapes from thorns or figs from
thistles. The case therefore, in my judgment, is one that calls for
clarification of thought, in the first instance, and when that has taken
place, it will be seen that the actual changes in our system which are
indicated by clear thought are few and simple. Clear thought, to begin
with, reestablishes the distinction between education and instruction or
training. Then, since experience shows that the great majority, though
quite ineducable, are capable of being trained, it seems to me that our
system's line of development is essentially the right one.

There is, obviously, a great social advantage in having a trained
citizenry, as there is in having a literate citizenry; but in both cases
the advantage is not what we thought it was, but something quite
different. There is no political advantage, such as Mr. Jefferson
imagined, in having a literate citizenry; experience, I should say, has
established this beyond doubt; but an artisan, for example, who can read
a slip of printed directions is more of a social asset than one who
cannot, for he makes less trouble for other people in getting the hang
of his work. Similarly, though the actual civilization of a society does
not especially profit if the ineducable majority are given all the
instruction they can take in, its material well-being is in a way to be
considerably advanced thereby, and the sum of its happiness is no doubt
in a way to be somewhat increased. I speak thus cautiously because this
outcome, as you know, depends wholly on the kind of economic system that
the society has in force. Under one kind of system, indeed, a trained
citizenry may be only the more profitably exploitable in virtue of this
superior training, and the advantage in material well-being may thus
accrue only the more largely to a small owning and exploiting class. But
with due allowance made for these circumstances, one may say broadly
that a society is better off for having its ineducables as well trained
as they are capable of becoming. Well, then, here surely is the argument
for vocationalism; it is a perfectly sound one, so why not accept it
instead of wasting time over others which are not sound, but are on the
contrary, quite specious? Here is the ground of justification for the
"new million-dollar high school," for Mr. Butler's new type of
institutional organization, and for an extension of the elective plan
clear to the logical limit of the bargain-counter, grab-bag or drugstore
policy.

Let us be quite serious about this. There are two distinct points of
view. Hitherto we have been considering our system and its institutional
life from the point of view of education. Now we are considering them
from the point of view of instruction or training. If in the first
instance we are perfectly clear in our minds about what it is we wish to
do — that is, to train to the best advantage a vast number of ineducable
persons — really, is not our system, in all essential respects, pretty
well organized to do it, and are not our institutions giving a fairly
good account of themselves in point of results? I think so. Then if this
be admitted, can any one suggest anything more to the purpose than that
our system should remain virtually as it is, and that our institutions
should go on doing what they are doing now? I think it very doubtful.

For my own part, if my attention were officially invited to the matter,
I should have but two suggestions to offer. At present, our
institutions, all the way through the system, feel a certain
responsibility, over and above their function as training schools, for
doing as much with education as under their very untoward circumstances
they are able to do. This is a great disability, and it should be
removed. It is imposed on them only by unclear thinking, as we may see
by a moment's glance at their actual situation. We set up an
institution, load it to the gunwales with ineducable persons, proceed to
train them in bricklaying, dishwashing, retail shoe merchandising, or
what not, and then insist that there should be somewhere a poor
pennyworth of bread thrown in with this intolerable deal of sack.

Mr. Butler says that the results accruing to our processes are "admitted
to be anything but satisfactory." But from what point of view? Certainly
not from that of the actual intention of the system, of the institution.
The only question, really, is whether the persons trained in the
institution turn out good bricklayers, shoe salesmen, dishwashers. If
they do — and I am not in a position to say whether they do or not —
then I submit that the new type of institutional organization has done
all that can be expected of it, and is entitled to a clean bill. From
the point of view of education — the point of view that we have hitherto
taken — Mr. Butler's observation is sound beyond peradventure. But under
the circumstances is it competent for him to take that point of view? I
cannot see that it is.

It was this thought that prompted my playful reply to my Italian friend,
whose comment I mentioned at the outset of these lectures. He, like Mr.
Butler, was vaguely expecting our system to produce something that it is
not organized to produce and cannot possibly produce, and was vaguely
disappointed at finding no such product. Judged by its intention, I
should say, as I said to my Italian friend, that it is doing extremely
well; and I suggest that it should be relieved of any responsibility
beyond its intention. If the press reports are true, Mr. Henry Ford, in
[his school for boys at
Sudbury](http://www.time.com/time/printout/0,8816,786775,00.html), has
worked out a plan that seems to correspond exactly with the suggestion
that I am making. He takes boys in — presumably all ineducable, as none
other would see any reason for going there — and trains them in purely
instrumental knowledge with never a grain of formative knowledge from
first to last. In this I think he is precisely right; and I venture to
think that just this is what all our institutions should be doing, and
that a great many more institutions should be set up to do the same
thing, for the ineducable are among us as the sands of the sea for
multitude.

"The ineducable are among us as the sands of the sea for multitude."

The other suggestion that I would make is that having thus dropped all
pretense to an educational character, our system and its institutions
should drop all titles, like that of college and university, which by
age-long usage intimate this character. Our system is not educational;
we have seen that its fundamental theory makes it impossible to
attribute any such character to it. Its institutions are not educational
institutions. Why, then, should there be any pretense to the contrary?
Nobody, I think, could say more in praise of Mr. Butler's newer type of
institutional organization than I have just now said. Nobody could be
more cordially in favor of it than I am. Yet I repeat that there is
great violence and great impropriety in describing it as a university
organization; great violence, in wresting a very old title quite away
from anything remotely resembling its traditional significance; and
great impropriety, by consequence, in exposing the public, always
careless in such matters, to the risk of most serious misapprehension.

I noticed the other day in a French newspaper a quotation from the dean
of Harvard University's School of Business Administration. The writer
was puzzled, as well he might be, about this novel and anomalous
designation, and finally compromised with his conscience by putting the
title in quotation marks, and calling this dignitary the dean of the
faculty of "Affaires." It seems to me that this trifling incident puts
the matter in a clear light. There is nothing in the world wrong with a
school of business administration. We ought to have a great many of
them, and make them all as good as we can; they are invaluable. But a
school of business administration existing as a university faculty is an
inadmissible anomaly, quite as this French editorial writer perceived it
to be.

Let me take every pains to avoid misunderstanding. The institution with
which I am connected is doing a good and great work, a necessary work,
and doing it extremely well. Mr. Butler's ideas of this work, as set
forth in his last presidential address are, I think, beyond the reach of
cavil or question. If I had my way, I would set up institutions on the
same model all over the land. But I think it is most unjustifiable to
call this institution a university, because, by age-long use and wont,
the title conveys a wholly erroneous notion of the institution's
character and activities. Surely there is nothing discreditable, say,
about the name "institute"; it is in good usage everywhere, and carries
just the right notion of what now goes on under the name of university
work. As far as I know, there does not exist a university or an
undergraduate college, in the traditional and proper sense, anywhere in
the country. I cannot see that there would be any conceivable sacrifice
of prestige if our institutions honorably and scrupulously gave up a
title to which they have but a most questionable right, and called
themselves institutes. There is plenty of good precedent for this. The
Royal Institute, the Istituto Fiskoy the Institute of Science, in our
own country the Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute, your Virginia
Polytechnic Institute at Blacksburg, the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, the Stevens Institute, the Rice Institute — the title is an
honorable one, and deceives no one by the implication of an improper
pretense.

My suggestion would include the suppression of meaningless and
misleading individual academic titles as well as institutional titles.
As Mr. Flexner has pointed out, there is something monstrous and
shocking about the conferring of an academic degree in the liberal arts,
on the strength of such qualifications as he cites — wrestling, poultry
raising, advertising research, clothing decoration, and so on. Mr.
Flexner has spoken so well and forcefully of this unnatural proceeding
that I can add nothing to what he has said.

If I should come here and try to impress you by saying that my
institution turned out so many hundred Masters of Arts last year, and
would turn out so many hundred more this year, I should expect you to
reply somewhat thus: "Yes, that is all very fine, very good, but what
are they like? To bear the degree of Master of Arts is an immense
pretension, and noblesse oblige — how are they justifying it? Are they
showing disciplined and experienced minds, are they capable of
maintaining a mature and informed disinterestedness, a humane and
elevated serenity, in all their views of human life? Do they display
invariably the imperial distinction of spirit, the patrician fineness of
taste, which we have been taught to associate with that degree of
proficiency in the liberal arts? We cannot see that the kind of
discipline to which you say they have been subjected has any such
bearing. Gymnastics, copy editing, stenography, food etiquette, home
laundering, and such like, are commendable pursuits, and we are all for
having them well and freely taught, but we cannot see that they tend in
the least towards what we have always understood an advanced degree in
the liberal arts to mean. Therefore if you ask us to congratulate you on
the number of your graduates, we must first have a look at their
quality."

But if our system is doing as well as all this, you may say, if it turns
out to be so much on the right track, after all, why trouble oneself
about it, especially if the only changes one can suggest are a trifling
matter of nomenclature and the suppression of a little forced play with
formative knowledge?

Well, I do not press either suggestion, even though I think that the
matter of nomenclature is important because words have power. "The range
of words is wide," says Homer; "words may tend this way or that way." A
just care for words, a reasonable precision in nomenclature, is of great
help in maintaining one's intellectual integrity. One can easily cheat
oneself with words; one can as easily intoxicate oneself with them. But
we may let this go; I should not be overcritical of our system on these
grounds; I should not be disposed, in fact, to bear very heavily on its
defects when reckoned against its excellences, were it not for just one
matter to which we have not yet directed our attention.

XI - But What of the Educable?
------------------------------

This matter is the status of the educable person. Hitherto our
observations have been only upon the status of the ineducable in our
regime; we have said nothing about the educable. Such persons exist
among us, and in about as considerable numbers, I should say, as exist
elsewhere. With reference to them we may observe, first, that they are
socially valuable, they are a potential asset; and second, that our
system does not, and by the conditions of its theory cannot, do anything
whereby we may realize on their value. They simply go to waste, and as
matters stand, they must do so.

"As far as I know, there does not exist a university or an undergraduate
college, in the traditional and proper sense, anywhere in the country."

This consideration is the only thing that has seemed to myself to
justify me in occupying your attention with this subject — the only
thing, in fact, that makes the subject interesting to me. Our system,
our new type of institutional organization and influence, does
everything, probably, that can be done for the ineducable, for the motor
minded, for all types among those we have been considering. All honor to
it for that! Clearly, then, if everybody were motor minded, ineducable,
without hope of development beyond adolescence, it would be an excellent
system indeed. If, again, the educable individual were socially
valueless, one would be sorry for his misfortunes, of course, but one
would hardly feel it worth one's while to parade them before this
assemblage, nor could one hope to arouse more than an eleemosynary
interest in them. But if the educable person be admitted to exist among
us and to be worth developing; and if it be shown that our system not
only does not, but under its theory cannot, direct and promote his due
development, then, I think, the time that we have devoted to the
examination of this theory has not been spent in vain.

We need not waste words over the assumption that the educable person
exists here. We have always had him with us, so it would be fair to
suppose *a priori* that his breed has not completely died out. Besides,
we occasionally see him; not often, but often enough to suggest that he
does not exist as a mere survival, a [*dodo
solitarius*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rodrigues_Solitaire), but that
he is produced about as regularly as ever. We need not, I repeat, occupy
ourselves with his vital statistics. We may, however, briefly examine
one or two of our main reasons for thinking that the educable person is,
from a social point of view, worth consideration, and that in behalf of
the common welfare, something should be made of him.

The educable person, in contrast to the ineducable, is one who gives
promise of some day being able to think; and the object of educating
him, of subjecting him to the Great Tradition's discipline, is to put
him in the way of right thinking, clear thinking, mature and profound
thinking. Now, the experienced mind is aware that all the progress in
actual civilization that society has ever made has been brought about,
not by machinery, not by political programs, platforms, parties, not
even by revolutions, but by right thinking. One feature appears with
unfailing regularity upon the long panorama of human activity which our
discipline exhibits to us. We see there that every social enterprise,
every movement, every policy, which was not conceived in right thinking
and carried out under the direction of right thinking, has in the long
run cost more than it came to. Nature, if you like that term, has levied
a fine on it, proportioned with interesting precision to the degree of
its departure from the counsels of right thinking. Our discipline
enforces no more weighty and memorable lesson than this. Nature takes
her own time, sometimes a long time, about exacting her penalty, and
often gets at it by strange, unexpected and roundabout ways; but exact
it in the end she always does, and to the last penny. It would appear,
then, that a society which takes no account of the educable person,
makes no place for him, does nothing with him, is taking a considerable
risk — so considerable that in the whole course of human experience, as
far as our records go, no society ever yet has taken it without coming
to great disaster. It has been tried before; as I said, the testimony of
our discipline is most impressively explicit on this point. It has been
tried before by societies relatively as rich, powerful, self-assertive
and self-congratulatory as ours — the glib complacency of Mr. Hoover in
his public utterances is, one may say, word for word the glib
complacency of [Cleon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleon) or of
[Trajan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trajan) in theirs — but none has
ever yet succeeded in safely putting that risk at defiance.

At present our society is in most serious economic difficulties. The
truly mature person, bred in the Great Tradition, could at any time have
reached into his accumulation of experience and found a match for each
one of these difficulties, and for every circumstance of each, every
sequence of cause and effect. The happenings of the last eight or ten
years have simply added another set of stereotyped registrations to his
stock of experience. There is nothing new about them, nothing strange or
unpredictable. Yet I am sure you have remarked, as I have, the
extraordinary, the unconscionable incompetence with which these
happenings have been met by those whom our society regards as its
"leaders of thought." Indeed, the universality of this incompetence and
its incredible degradation are perhaps all that puts a distinguishing
mark on the circumstances of the period.

I may give one example. One of the men most in the public eye holds a
high place in industry and finance. All his sayings and doings are made
much of in the press, which represents him as a person of almost
unearthly wisdom. His prominence in some international transactions a
short time ago made his name a household word. I think, though I am not
quite sure, that he holds an honorary degree from Columbia University.

After the depression had been running for about a year, a friend of mine
who knows him very well met him, and said, "I suppose you have learned a
good deal in these twelve months; tell me what you have learned."

"Yes, indeed," he replied. "We have learned that it won't do to reduce
wages."

Think of it! To have gone through a year of economic convulsions of
catastrophic importance, and to have learned *that*! One might suppose
that the survivor of a deluge, say some Hasisadra or Noah, or one who
had lived through the subsidence of Atlantis, as Plato describes it,
would see point to digging into the natural laws that govern such
happenings and finding out all he could about them, in the hope of
turning up something that might be useful in the event of their
threatened recurrence. Suppose you met one of these survivors and asked
what he had learned from his experience, and he told you with a great
air of finality that he had learned that it is a good thing to go in
when it rains! A most incompetent answer, you would say, a childish
answer, the effort of an immature, ineducable mind. Yet not one whit
more so than the answer given by this person, to whom the nation, in a
sense, looks up.

"The educable person, in contrast to the ineducable, is one who gives
promise of some day being able to think; and the object of educating
him, of subjecting him to the Great Tradition's discipline, is to put
him in the way of right thinking, clear thinking, mature and profound
thinking."

You may easily see the bearing that all this has upon our subject. If
you are not by this time tired of having me use my university as a
[*corpus vile*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corpus_vile) for anatomical
purposes, I will venture to bring it forward once more. Last summer, in
a speech at Paris, Mr. Butler spoke of Russian economic competition and
the Five-Year Plan. He made the excellent and salutary observation that
the Five-Year Plan, whether a good, bad, or indifferent plan, was a
plan, and that the rest of the world was planless. "I have great concern
for the man with a competing social and economic system, if we do not
demonstrate the supremacy of ours. I have great concern for the man with
a plan, competing with a planless world." This is admirable; it touches
the marrow of our good sense. "What I ask for," Mr. Butler continued,
"is a plan; a plan to solve problems that have become international. Not
to sit and wait, not to stand and wait, not to abuse the people with a
plan, but to present a better plan…."

Just so. It seems competent then, in the first instance, to say to Mr.
Butler, "You ask for a plan — very well, produce one. Produce one that
shall take strict and logical account of every economic factor in the
situation. It can be done. But the plan must be one that shows the same
integrity of purpose in its construction that is apparent in the
Five-Year Plan; otherwise it will get nowhere. Do not speak of the
League of Nations; we have seen leagues of nations before, all the way
back to the [Amphictyonic
League](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amphictyonic_League); we know all
about them, what their real purpose and function are, and we can
recognize at a glance every specious pretext under which these have ever
been disguised. Do not, moreover, give your plan a political character
or attempt a political approach to the problems with which it proposes
to deal. We know what political government is, its history, and the
limitations under which it must work, the limitations put upon it by its
primary intention and character, and there is no use trying to make
anything in the realm of politics and statecraft stand up to the
Five-Year Plan; the first collision will break it into kindling-wood."

So we might say; and Mr. Butler could produce such a plan with no great
effort and no very heavy investment of originality. But producing a plan
is not everything; one must also get it accepted, and the first thing
needful towards getting it generally accepted is its acceptance by a
body, large or small, of informed and intelligent opinion. Now, suppose
Mr. Butler produced his plan, could he find in this country, or could
there be found for him, such a body of opinion to understand, accept,
and support it? Quite clearly no such body of opinion could be found.
Those who most naturally would first take the plan under review are such
as the gentleman I just now mentioned as having learned so much from the
country's recent economic experiences — one could run off their names
from memory, hardly missing a single one — and you can imagine what that
order of intelligence would make of it. Your imagination will at once
supply, without any aid from me, a sense of what the upshot of the plan
would be, and this will be enough, and more than enough, to convince you
that Mr. Butler's demand for a plan amounts to a counsel of perfection.

Well, then, that being so, it seems to me quite competent for us to turn
on Mr. Butler, and ask what Columbia University has been about all these
years. If it had retained the character of an educational institution,
devoting itself to educating educable persons, making this its primary
interest, it would now, probably, by itself alone, be contributing a
pretty fair quota towards a body of opinion intelligent enough, at
least, to know a sound plan when it saw one. Formerly, Columbia turned
out a respectable number of such individuals. The educable person is
still here in the raw, and a few of his kind, as a finished product,
would come in uncommonly handy at the moment. What has Columbia to say
in the premises? What has our whole educational system to say?

The question is pertinent. The sum of the matter is that when
circumstances tighten up, and profound, disinterested thought is called
for, it becomes manifest that the newer type of institutional
organization and influence does not fill the bill. One may say generally
that in its utter helplessness with the educable person it does not fill
the bill in any circumstances. We citizens of the republic of letters
have no wish to escape the responsibility of saying just this, and we do
say it. But in particular we remark also that at times like the present
the antisocial character of this type of organization is most clearly
apparent. Our society can get along for considerable periods by the
process known as "muddling through," in more or less cheerful disregard
of the absence of thought and intelligence. We take up the tabernacle of
[Moloch](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moloch) and
[Chiun](http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=468&letter=C&search=Chiun),
our images — Mr. Coolidge's two-gallon hat and Mr. Henry Ford's conveyor
system — and follow the star of our god Buncombe along ways which seem
not too insecure. But occasionally circumstances arise which make it
imperative that some one should do some thinking, even as Mr. Butler
suggests; and in its utter incompetence with the only person among us
who gives promise of ever being able to think, our newer type of
institutional organization has failed us so notably that the term
antisocial, applied to its character, seems neither unjust nor inurbane.

XII - Gresham's Law
-------------------

Nevertheless, we must be careful to observe that this slighting of the
educable person has not been deliberate, willful, or heedless; nor has
it ever failed to give rise to great searchings of heart, even among
those who are obliged to fall in with it. My impression is, as I have
already said — and I give it wholly under correction and for what it is
worth — my impression is that a great deal of the general
dissatisfaction with our system may be run directly back to this root. I
suspect, though I say it with all delicacy and diffidence, that this is
largely the ground of Mr. Butler's discontent, and that the ground of
his anxiety is the apparent assurance that, as things stand, nothing in
the world can be done about it. Of course, working under the
prescription of an impossible theory is attended by a continual sense of
frustration, impotence and failure — this is always bound to be the
case, it must be so — but I believe that this sense is most acutely felt
at this point. I have heard say that professional teachers tend to
become petty and ingrowing. I do not know that this is so, but if it be
so, there is surely some extenuation to be found in the theoretical
conditions under which they exercise their calling.

Mr. Flexner says that "a student of Columbia College may study serious
subjects in a serious fashion." I do not know just what he means by
this. On the face of it, the statement is commonplace; anybody anywhere
may study serious subjects in a serious fashion. The things to be
considered, assuming that he be educable as well as serious, are what he
gets out of it, and whether his circumstances permit him to get enough
out of it to make his exertions worthwhile. If Mr. Flexner means that an
educable person can in any proper sense of the term get an education in
Columbia College, I must disagree with him. I firmly believe that no
such thing is possible; and now, with your permission, I will skirt the
margin of good taste by saying that I firmly believe no such thing is
possible in any American institution with which I am acquainted.

Why should this be so? Let me put it this way: Why is it impossible for
Columbia to be a training school for the ineducable with one side of its
being, and an educational institution for the educable with the other? I
cannot answer that question. There seems no reason for it *a priori*.
Would not a mere slight mechanical rearrangement easily bring the thing
about — so much institutional energy and attention sluiced off to turn
the one set of wheels, so much sluiced off to turn the other? It would
seem so. There is certainly no indisposition on the part of the
authorities towards anything of the kind; quite the contrary. There is
no prejudice or prepossession against the educable person; all hands are
ready to do their best by him; they are more than willing; they would
gladly make every effort compatible with the general theory that governs
their procedure. So much is true also, probably, of the average run of
our institutions; we may at any rate well believe it is true of them.
But there seems to be somewhere in the order of nature some obscure and
powerful factor making steadily against any sort of success worth
speaking of.

When we talk about the order of nature, or a law of nature, we mean no
more than a registration of experience. The final "causes of things," so
wistfully apostrophised by
[Lucretius](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucretius), seem forever beyond
us, even the causes of the most commonplace phenomena. We are fond of
thinking we have solved a problem of cause and effect, when all we have
done, really, is to move it a step or two backward. We say that when
bodies, free to fall, fall always down and never up, they do so in
obedience to the law of gravitation; but we really know of no such law.
What we mean is that in all human experience free bodies have invariably
behaved in that way, and this gives rise to a correspondingly strong
expectation that they will continue to behave in that way; but of any
"law" compelling them to do so, we know nothing.

Some years ago I was in Turin, where bakers were trying to make a
certain breadstuff as it was made in Genoa, only a few miles away. They
could not do it. They brought down flour from Genoa, they brought down
workmen, they even brought down water in casks, they reproduced every
condition of Genoese manufacture as far as human intelligence could
discern them, but with no success. No one could account for this;
probably no one ever will; so we say there was something in the order of
nature against the project. One of our physicists, the other day,
speaking of a magnet's pull on steel, said he could clear the problem,
perhaps move it one or two steps backward, but as for solving it, the
best he could do was to say that the magnet pulled on the steel because
God willed it should do so. Consider the simplest and most obvious
commonplaces of observation, the periodicity of hay fever, the phenomena
of measles or seasickness, or even the distribution of hair on the human
body — no one on earth knows or can surmise any more plausible final
reason for them than that God wants them to be that way.

Thus I cannot answer our question why our institutions may not deal
satisfactorily with the ineducable and the educable at the same time. We
only know that with every exercise of good will in the premises, they do
not, apparently cannot, and for all we can see, never will; so we say
that there seems to be something in the order of nature against their so
doing, some principle to which the attempt at this procedure is
repugnant. [They fought from heaven, cried Deborah; the stars in their
courses fought against
Sisera.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sisera#Sisera_in_Kabbalistic_Thought)
In the realm of the spirit, as of the flesh, certain salutary ways,
certain lines of wholesome and rewarding procedure, seem to be marked
out for us, and we cannot profitably transgress them. Such knowledge of
them as we have is empirical and tentative. All we really know of them,
indeed, is that they are there; and we remember the noble passage, grand
with all the grandeur of a chorus of Æschylus, in which Bishop Butler
insists that the imperfection of man's knowledge is all the greater
reason for his strict obedience, as far as his knowledge goes, in order
that "he may never make the dreadful experiment of leaving the course of
life marked out for him by nature, whatever that nature be, and entering
upon paths of his own, of which he can foresee neither the dangers nor
the end."

But a recapitulation of some of the matters that we have already
observed will go some way, perhaps, towards making this incompatibility
of function seem reasonable. How is it possible, really, as a matter of
what old-school psychologists called "the common sense of mankind," for
an institution to affirm a pseudo-equalitarian, pseudo-democratic theory
at one end of its campus, and deny it at the other? How can it
effectively honor the Great Tradition on one side of the street, and
disparage it on the opposite side? How can it effectively maintain a
Holmes, Lowell, Adams, Pancoast, Humphreys, Osler, Gildersleeve, in one
set of buildings while devoting another set to their practical
extermination? One is reminded, though the parallel is possibly not
quite exact, of the French painter's acute observation that art cannot
be incorruptible part of the time. One is also reminded of the formula
known in economics as Gresham's Law, that "bad money drives out good";
the two cannot exist in circulation side by side, and it is always the
good money that is forced out. I do not mean to imply that the work of
the training school is bad money; on the contrary, I have taken pains to
express my great respect for it, my appreciation of the need of it, and
my wish that it could be extended. I mean only that it is in all
respects so different from the work of an educational institution that
the attempt to compass both under the same general direction is bound to
be ineffectual, and that the mere force of volume would always tend to
drive the latter out.

XIII - Vested Interest in Bad Theory
------------------------------------

We said at the outset that this discussion could not be made to lead to
any practical, or rather practicable, conclusion, and we are now at the
point where we must face that embarrassment. Things being as they are,
one's natural desire is to see what can be done about them. Frankly, I
do not see that anything can be done about them. There is no trouble
about seeing what might be done, perhaps what should be done, but what
can be done is another matter. First let us see what we citizens of the
republic of letters, mindful of Plato's injunction, think might be done.

We would say to ourselves first, "The whole theory on which we are
working is egregiously wrong, unsound, absurd, and there is no possible
compromise with an unsound theory; nature always steps in and exacts her
penalty. Ignorance is no excuse with her; good intentions are no
extenuation. Our system does many good things, it has much more good in
it than bad, but the good things it does are done under the sanction of
an unsound theory, and incur the penalties that nature always lays on
such enterprises. Therefore the only policy is one of 'thorough.' Let us
simply discard this unsound theory, and substitute a sound one, one that
answers to the facts of experience, just as we discarded Ptolemaic
astronomy for Copernican, and as we substituted chemistry for alchemy.
Pseudo-equalitarian and pseudo-democratic ideas have no place in
educational theory, so let us make a clean sweep of them, and rearrange
our practice accordingly."

This would indeed be no very exorbitant proposal, no more so than a
proposal to abandon the geographical theory of [Cosmas
Indicopleustes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmas_Indicopleustes) or
the cosmogony of the book of Genesis. Yet it could not be carried out;
you may perceive at once that it could not be carried out, for very
powerful collateral interests have grown up around our theory, tending
to hold it firmly in place. Mention of the Mosaic cosmogony suggests a
parallel; you are, of course, aware of the very strong institutional
interest which we may almost say is built into that theory, and you know
how long the strength of that interest has enabled the theory to hold
out. You know the story of Galileo's collision with a similar
institutional interest. Some great man of the last generation, I think
Professor Huxley, though I am not quite sure, said bitterly that plenty
of people would be found to deny the law of gravitation if a collateral
interest of this kind were opposed to it. Just here, again for example,
comes in the difficulty of discarding or even revising the extraordinary
and remarkable official theory on which the United States is attempting
to deal with the liquor traffic. Experience has made it clear beyond
doubt or peradventure that prohibition in the United States is not a
moral issue; it is not essentially, even, a political issue; it is a
vested interest.

Our educational system is thus in a plight closely corresponding to that
of our economic system. Many people are uneasy about our economic
system; as you know, experience is forcibly directing attention to it,
with the result that its unsoundness of theory is becoming more and more
clearly apparent. Many people think it should be changed, even
radically; there is no trouble about seeing just how it should be
changed; but nobody is quite prepared to face the enormous deflation
that would ensue if it were changed. One is reminded of the story of the
boa constrictor that swallowed a rabbit, then reached through a hole in
a fence, and swallowed another. The bulk of the rabbits held the snake's
body immovable in the hole; he could go neither forwards nor backwards.
He could have backed out into freedom by disgorging the second rabbit,
but he was not prepared to face this deflation; and so he died. Our
economic system is in just that situation, and so, in all its essential
respects, is our educational system. The general disposition would be to
hold tight, like the snake, yielding nothing, and hoping vaguely that
some saving intervention might come along to cut in between cause and
effect. This disposition is no doubt profoundly unintelligent; the
entertainment of this hope is quite unhistorical — no such hope was ever
yet rewarded. But we all know that this disposition is what a sound and
really effective reform of our system would chiefly have to reckon with.

"The revision of our educational theory would of itself put no one out
of business; on the contrary, we would all have more business, better
business, and be able much more to enjoy our devotion to it."

Here, however, I should like to enter a caveat against possible
misunderstanding. My observation of human nature is by no means so
superficial as that I should for one moment intimate this disposition to
be wholly that of Alexander the coppersmith, arising from individual
fear of being put out of business. The revision of our educational
theory would of itself put no one out of business; on the contrary, we
would all have more business, better business, and be able much more to
enjoy our devotion to it. The narrowest trade-unionist view of the
situation could discern nothing to be afraid of; better far all round, I
should say, if there were everything for it to be afraid of. No, what I
have in mind as determining this disposition is chiefly the composite
force of inertia, diffidence, preoccupation, a kind of timidity that
looks on [*omne ignotum pro
magnifico*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Latin_phrases_%28F%E2%80%93O%29#O),
infirmity of purpose, the tendency to absorption in one's immediate
interests and surroundings, deference to convention, and so on — all
which may be put down as among the weaknesses of our common humanity,
and not to be judged on moral grounds too harshly, if at all.

Side by side with these goes one very curious and interesting trait,
perhaps the most illogical to be found in all human nature's apparently
limitless resources of bad logic; and upon this, on account of its
particular interest, I shall dwell for a moment.

I refer to the strange inexplicable loyalty that the average person
seems to feel called upon to exercise towards a system out of which he
has in one way or another done well, or perhaps only passably well, even
though in his heart he disbelieves in it, disapproves of it, and would
gladly sacrifice the prospect of any further actual gain for the
satisfaction of seeing it abolished. This, too, is not a trait that we
need feel called upon to judge. All we need do is to examine it, remark
its strangeness, and take account of its bearing on our subject. Let me
recount one or two instances where it has fallen under my own
observation in what seemed to me a notable way.

Four or five years ago I was passing through the lobby of a hotel in New
York, in company with an acquaintance who had been one of the world's
foremost financiers, but was then retired. There was a broker's office
in the hotel, and we stopped for a moment to look at the quotations.
After we had watched them awhile, my friend said to me in an undertone,
"This is a filthy business; we are merely gambling in the sweat of a lot
of poor men." He was very rich; he did not care if he never turned
another penny in his life. Moreover, he no longer had any associations
or commitments to consider, and no friends who would have thought a whit
the less of him for the public expression of his honest opinion on any
subject. He also knew the economics of stock market transactions like a
book, knew just what he was talking about, and could give chapter and
verse for it to any one who might undertake to discuss their ethics with
him. Yet he would never say publicly what he said behind his hand to me;
it would be impossible to get him to do it. I urged him to come out with
it; business was then running up to the present crisis, and I thought
the public expression of his views would do some good, as I still think
it might, very probably would, have done. But he never spoke out; and
for no conceivable reason except the inhibitions put upon him by this
curious, illogical — as far as I can see, indefensible — sense of
loyalty to an economic system which he knew was thoroughly bad, for
which he felt a corresponding contempt and disgust, but out of which he
had done well.

A second instance concerned another friend in the business world, one of
the ablest and best men I ever knew, and one of the most successful. You
cannot identify him by anything I say, or even identify the part of the
world he lives in, so I am risking no breach of promise in speaking of
him. I saw him about a month after the great collapse of the stock
market two years ago, and he treated me to a half-hour of the most
searching and salty analysis of the situation. In the course of it, to
illustrate a point he was making, he told me he had some little holding
or other lying around in Wall Street that he had forgotten all about,
and could have manipulated a profit of $150,000 on it. "But I didn't
take that profit," he said, beating his desk with his fist, "and I
didn't take it *because — I — didn't — want it*. I didn't *need* it; and
I knew it would come out of elevator-boys, clerks, manicures,
stenographers and all sorts of people who couldn't afford to lose. I
don't like that kind of money." Then at once he said, "Now, don't you
ever tell a soul in the world that I have been talking to you in this
way." He was so concerned, you see, lest some one should know he had not
played the game by the rules, not taken his profit, not let conventional
ethics stand above humanitarian considerations; he was so fearful of the
implied criticism on an economic system which he regarded as despicable
but out of which he had done well, that he repeatedly insisted I should
never betray him.

So it seems that dissatisfaction with our system, however acute and
widespread, is unlikely to take shape in flat abandonment of our
educational theory; and short of that, it would appear that nothing can
be done which would go any great way towards mending matters, nothing
that would bring out the educable person and set him right with the
world. The educational system of Continental countries, like Mr.
Jefferson's, tends primarily towards salvaging the educable person,
seining him out of the general ruck, and making something of him. It
does this easily, naturally, purposefully, because it is not hamstrung
by any insane pseudo-equalitarian and pseudo-democratic notions about
education; it imports into its practice no such irrelevant nonsense as
those notions entail. It is based on the idea that educable persons are
relatively few, that their social value is great, that they are
accordingly precious and should be enabled to make the most of
themselves. It does reasonably well by the ineducable also, but it has
no sentimental or romanticist view of his capacities; it gives him such
training as he is able to accept, unornamented by finical stuff
corresponding to that with which our theory obliges us to decorate our
training, such, for example, as our "courses in English," "reading
periods," and the like. My impression is that the proportion of
naturally ineducable persons runs about as high in European populations
as in ours. European systems, however, do not go through the specious
and immoral pretense of educating them; they do not pretend that when
they are through processing a proverbially refractory raw material, the
product is a silk purse or anything in the least like a silk purse. They
are realistic, they see things as they are; and they stand in this sharp
contrast to our system because their theory is sound, while ours is
unsound.

Private enterprise in this country, it is true, might establish a set of
institutions for the educable only, consecrated to an unswerving service
of the Great Tradition; this would consist of a secondary school, an
undergraduate college, and a university comprising the four traditional
faculties of Literature, Law, Theology, and Medicine. But for obvious
reasons this set of institutions would stand a long time with its doors
locked, waiting for eligible persons to seek it out. Then when it began
to exist as a going concern, it would be existing against all the force
of wind and tide, under every temptation to eviscerate itself by
concession and compromise. If it kept to its intention, it would of
course triumph gloriously in the long run; but the run would be so long,
and the chances of its fidelity so doubtful, that private enterprise,
however enlightened and public spirited, could hardly be expected not to
hesitate. Then, too, there is the question of the administration of this
wholly alien enterprise. Where the Great Tradition is concerned, "plant"
is secondary; throughout the long course of its history, as we have
seen, the individual and his groupings have been the primary thing.

I am reminded of the profound and delicate words of the
[*Imitation*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imitation_of_Christ), that
superbly profound and delicate work of an author who chose to remain
unknown, content that his name should be written only in the Book of
Life. "It is a great art," [says the author of the
*Imitation*](http://www.catholicarchive.org/thomas_a_kempis/the_imitation_of_christ/2/08.html),
"to know how to converse with Jesus." Truly it is; it is an art of which
a lifetime's learning gives but the most beggarly rudiments.

Even so may we say that it is a great art to know how to be on living
terms with the Great Tradition. We who call ourselves continuators of
the Great Tradition are aware with bitterness that in so styling
ourselves we are but voicing an aspiration, we are but offering our
reverence to a distant, high and unapproachable ideal. We know better
than any one can tell us, how slight is our proficiency in the great art
of familiar converse with it. Well, then, in a society that not only has
lost that art but has lost even the knowledge that such an art exists, a
society in which the Great Tradition itself is in complete abeyance —
but I think I need say no more, the conclusion is manifest, it is
inescapable.

XIV - Conclusion and Reassurance
--------------------------------

But, sterile as this conclusion may be, sterile as in a sense all our
conclusions may be, they tend neither to despondency nor to feebleness
of endeavor. I may remind you — though I should not say that; let me
rather say I may put into words what I know is in the consciousness of
us all — that the Great Tradition will be no man's debtor. When we speak
of promoting it or continuing it, we are using a purely conventional
mode of speech, as when we say that the sun rises or sets. We can do
nothing for the Great Tradition; our fidelity to it can do everything
for us. Creatures of a day, how shall we think that what we do or leave
undone is of consequence to that which abides forever? Our devotion, our
integrity of purpose, our strictness of conscience, are not exercised in
behalf of the Great Tradition, but in our own behalf. Our recreancy
cannot weaken it, our faithfulness cannot strengthen it; we alone are
damaged by the one and edified by the other. The Great Tradition is
independent of us, not we of it. We can not augment or diminish the
force of its august and salutary laws; we can but keep to them, and
therein find our exceeding great reward.

We have therefore no responsibility but the happy one of keeping our eye
single to our own obedience. We need take no thought for the Great
Tradition's welfare, but only for our own; it asks no protection or
championship from us, and any volunteer service of this kind is mere
officiousness. We need not enter into the anxiety of the prophet who
reported to Jehovah that things were in the very worst way possible, the
cult of Baal triumphant, the true believers dispersed, their priests and
prophets slain with the sword, "and I, even I only, am left, and they
seek my life to take it away." One is almost certain that behind this
despairing speech lay the thought, "—and what would happen to the True
Faith if they should catch me too?" You remember with what delicate and
indulgent humor Jehovah took means to show him that the True Faith had
resources of its own, that it could pretty well manage to worry along,
and that he had better stop fretting about it, take a rest and get his
nerves together, and then go on attending to his proper business.

We are called to be disciples, not energumens. The Great Tradition will
go on because the forces of nature are on its side; it has on its side
an invincible ally, the self-preserving instinct of humanity. Men may
forsake it, but they will come back to it because they must; their
collective existence cannot permanently go on without it. Whole
societies may disallow it and set it at nought, as ours has done; they
may try to live by ways of their own, by bread alone, by bread and
buncombe, by riches and power, by economic exploitation, by intensive
industrialism, quantity-production, by what you please; but in the end
they will find, as so many societies have already found, that they must
return and seek the regenerative power of the Great Tradition, or lapse
into decay and death.

I leave you, then, with this reassurance. Seeing things as they are, we
perceive that the phase of life which appears peculiar to our own little
point of time and our little section of human society, is in a very real
sense no concern of ours; it is nothing to discourage or distress us, or
to distract us from our duty of diligent and trustful obedience. It is
only what, from the long-time point of view, we should expect.

[![book
cover](http://mises.org/store/productphotos/SS308.png)](http://mises.org/store/Theory-of-Education-in-the-United-States-The-P449C0.aspx)

[$19
$17](http://mises.org/store/Theory-of-Education-in-the-United-States-The-P449C0.aspx)

"There is no possible compromise with an unsound theory; nature always
steps in and exacts her penalty."

Two years ago I was in the museum at Bonn, where I saw the skull and
other bony vestiges of the Neanderthal Man. He would seem to have been a
terrible fellow in his day; and it is since his day, I presume, that
most of the qualities which we regard as distinctively social have been
developed in our race. Probably before and during his period the
humanization of man in society had not got very far. What impressed me
most was that this period, distant as it may seem in the immediate view,
is yet so recent that these frail fragments of a human or semi-human
osseous structure still remain, that I can see and handle them; they
have even retained their form so well that men of science are able to
make a pretty plausible reconstruction of our departed brother's whole
physique from the indications that they give. It is easy to run into a
culpable cynicism in the expectations that we put upon humanity's social
development; yet the sight of our poor old relative's remains suggests
very forcibly the ease with which those expectations may run into an
equally culpable extravagance.

I do not think that our American society will ever return to the Great
Tradition. I see no reason why it should not go on repeating the
experience of other societies, having already gone as far as it has
along the road of that experience, and find that when it at last
realizes the need of transforming itself, it has no longer the power to
do so. The terrible words of Persius are as applicable to the tyranny of
ideas as to any other mode of grasping and ruthless dictatorship. But
this is no concern of ours. The Great Tradition has not left itself
without abundant witness in contemporary societies, and as I began by
saying, the constitution of the republic of letters knows no such thing
as political nationalism. Our fellow citizens are ours where we find
them; and where they are not to be found we may regard ourselves as
citizens [*in
partibus*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In_partibus_infidelium),
uncommitted to an officious and ineffectual evangelism. Our allegiance
is to the constitution of our republic; we are committed only to clear
understanding and right thinking. If our present discussion has been of
any avail in encouraging these, we may perhaps believe that the
intention of this lectureship has been in some degree fulfilled.

[Albert Jay Nock](/articles.aspx?author=Nock) (October 13, 1870 – August
19, 1945) was an influential American libertarian author, educational
theorist, and social critic of the early and middle 20th century. Murray
Rothbard was deeply influenced by him, and so was the whole generation
of free-market thinkers of the 1950s. Comment on the
[blog](http://blog.mises.org/).

This essay is compiled from the [Page-Barbour
Lectures](http://artsandsciences.virginia.edu/pbrlect/) for 1931 at the
[University of Virginia](http://www.virginia.edu/).

##### Notes

[[1]](#ref1) The last annual report of the Carnegie Foundation,
published while this volume was in the press, contains most astonishing
testimony on this point.

[[2]](#ref2) The late president of the University of Virginia, Mr. E.A.
Alderman, who was presiding at the delivery of these lectures.

You can receive the Mises Dailies in your inbox. [Subscribe or
unsubscribe](/content/elist.asp).\

* * * * *

-   [Print](# "Print")
-   -   [Subscribe by Email](/content/elist.asp)
-   [RSS Feed](http://feeds.mises.org/MisesDailyArticles)
-   [Full-Text Feed](http://feeds.mises.org/MisesFullTextArticles)

* * * * *

-   [**Find us on
    Facebook**](http://www.facebook.com/mises.institute "Find us on Facebook")
-   [**Follow us on
    Twitter**](http://twitter.com/mises "Follow us on Twitter")
-   [**Subscribe to our RSS feed**](/rss "Subscribe to our RSS feed")
-   [**Mises on
    Amazon.com**](http://www.amazon.com/Mises-Economics-Blog/dp/B00336EQLW "Mises on Amazon.com")
-   [**Mises YouTube
    channel**](http://www.youtube.com/user/misesmedia "Mises' YouTube channel")
-   [**Mises as
    Picasa**](http://picasaweb.google.com/MisesInstitute/ "Mises at Picasa")
-   [**Markets and Data**](/markets.asp "Markets and Data")
-   [**Mises on iTunesU**](http://itunesu.mises.org "Mises on iTunesU")
-   [**Mises channel on
    YouTube**](http://www.youtube.com/user/misesmedia "Mises channel on YouTube")

\

-   [Get articles and news in your
    inbox](http://mises.org/content/elist.asp)

* * * * *

Browse the Daily
----------------

-   [Album View of Mises Daily Articles](http://mises.org/daily/Album/)
-   [List View of Mises Daily Articles](http://mises.org/daily/List/)
-   [Mises Authors](http://mises.org/authors)

-   [Subscribe to the Daily Audio
    Podcast](http://feeds.mises.org/AudioMisesDaily)
-   [Subscribe to the Daily Daily
    Feed](http://feeds.mises.org/misesdailyarticles)
-   [Subscribe to the Daily Daily Full-Text
    Feed](http://feed.mises.org/MisesFullTextArticles)

[![image](http://feeds.mises.org/~fc/MisesDailyArticles?bg=99CCFF&fg=444444&anim=1)](http://feeds.mises.org/MisesDailyArticles)

\
\

About the Author
----------------

![Photo of Albert Jay
Nock](http://images.mises.org/people/nock_albert_jay.jpg)

Albert Jay Nock

[View Author Archive](/daily/author/731/Albert-Jay-Nock) \

Albert Jay Nock (October 13, 1870 – August 19, 1945) was an influential
American libertarian author, educational theorist, and social critic of
the early and middle 20th century. Murray Rothbard was deeply influenced
by him, and so was the whole generation of free-market thinkers of the
1950s.

Bastiat Blog
------------

-   [Remembering Mr. Libertarian on his
    birthday](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7068) *3/2/2014 2:28:47 PM by
    [Gary Galles]()*
-   [Academic Papers Filled With
    Nonsense--Literally](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7065) *3/2/2014
    12:59:29 PM by [Joseph Salerno]()*
-   [A Bit More on Pete Seeger](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7059)
    *3/1/2014 6:09:35 PM by [Hunt
    Tooley](http://artemis.austincollege.edu/acad/history/htooley/Tooley.html)*
-   [Bylund on Resistance Radio](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7057)
    *3/1/2014 11:01:34 AM by [Per Bylund](http://www.PerBylund.com)*
-   [Is Bad Weather Behind Weak US Economic
    Trends?](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7054) *3/1/2014 8:53:52 AM by
    [Mises Updates]()*
-   [Restaurants Charge Customers for Obama
    Care](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7043) *2/28/2014 3:24:24 PM by
    [Joseph Salerno]()*
-   [The Fed: Blame It On The Weather](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7040)
    *2/28/2014 12:07:29 PM by [Ryan McMaken]()*
-   [95,000 Likes!](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7037) *2/28/2014
    11:06:41 AM by [Mises Updates]()*
-   [Video: Support the Austrian Economics Research
    Conference](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7021) *2/28/2014 10:50:30 AM
    by [Mises Updates]()*
-   [Funny Attack on Mises](http://bastiat.mises.org/?p=7031) *2/28/2014
    10:44:31 AM by [Ryan McMaken]()*

[view all…](http://blog.mises.org/) [mises blog
rss](http://feeds.mises.org/MisesBlog)

Upcoming Events
---------------

[rss](/events.xml)

-   [![Event
    Image](http://images.mises.org/events/AERC2014.jpg)](/events/179/Austrian-Economics-Research-Conference-2014 "Austrian Economics Research Conference 2014  ")
-   [![Event
    Image](http://images.mises.org/events/HS_20140411_Auburn.jpg)](/events/185/Inflation-Causes-Consequences-and-Cure-A-seminar-for-High-School-and-College-Students "Inflation: Causes, Consequences, and Cure. A seminar for High School and College Students ")
-   [![Event
    Image](http://images.mises.org/events/RGS2014.jpg)](/events/173/Rothbard-Graduate-Seminar "Rothbard Graduate Seminar  ")
-   [![Event
    Image](/images/events/MU14_event_banner.jpg)](/events/184/Mises-University-2014 "Mises University 2014 ")

[view all…](/events/)

[The Quotable Mises](/quotes.aspx)
----------------------------------

[Ludwig von
Mises:](http://mises.org/quotes.aspx?action=subject&subject=Foreign%20Aid)
"We must comprehend that it is impossible to improve the economic
conditions of the underdeveloped nations by grants in aid. If we send
them foodstuffs to fight famines, we merely relieve their governments
from the necessity of abandoning their disastrous agricultural
policies." - [Money, Method, and the Market
Process](http://mises.org/quotes.aspx?action=source&Source=Money,%20Method,%20and%20the%20Market%20Process)

[**RSS Feed for
Literature**](/literature.xml "Subscribe to the RSS Feed")
[](/Literature)

**Literature**
--------------

-   [Libertarian Critique of Intellectual
    Property](/document/7232/Libertarian-Critique-of-Intellectual-Property)
    *by [Butler Shaffer](/literature/author/681/Butler-Shaffer)*
-   [What Must Be Done](/document/4365/What-Must-Be-Done) *by
    [Hans-Hermann Hoppe](/literature/author/164/HansHermann-Hoppe)*
-   [Fascism versus
    Capitalism](/document/7219/Fascism-versus-Capitalism) *by [Llewellyn
    H. Rockwell Jr.](/literature/author/275/Llewellyn-H-Rockwell-Jr)*
-   [Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic
    Evolution](/document/118/Theory-and-History-An-Interpretation-of-Social-and-Economic-Evolution)
    *by [Ludwig von Mises](/literature/author/280/Ludwig-von-Mises)*
-   [Lessons for the Young
    Economist](/document/5706/Lessons-for-the-Young-Economist) *by
    [Robert P. Murphy](/literature/author/380/Robert-P-Murphy)*
-   [Economic Principles](/document/3090/Economic-Principles) *by [Frank
    A. Fetter](/literature/author/117/Frank-A-Fetter)*
-   [Reassessing the Presidency: The Rise of the Executive State and the
    Decline of
    Freedom](/document/3358/Reassessing-the-Presidency-The-Rise-of-the-Executive-State-and-the-Decline-of-Freedom)
    *by [John V. Denson](/literature/author/492/John-V-Denson)*
-   [Essentials of Economic
    Theory](/document/2980/Essentials-of-Economic-Theory) *by [John
    Bates Clark](/literature/author/743/John-Bates-Clark)*
-   [An Outline of International Price
    Theory](/document/3067/An-Outline-of-International-Price-Theory) *by
    [Chi-Yuen Wu](/literature/author/749/ChiYuen-Wu)*

[**RSS Feed for
Audio**](/media.xml "Subscribe to the RSS Feed")[](/media)

**Audio**
---------

-   [Capitalism: Archenemy of
    Nazism](/media/8247/Capitalism-Archenemy-of-Nazism) *by [Mark
    Thornton](/media/authors/288/Mark-Thornton)*
-   [A Misesian View of the
    Economy](/media/8246/A-Misesian-View-of-the-Economy) *by [Jeff
    Deist](/media/authors/1793/Jeff-Deist)*
-   [Economics and Freedom](/media/8245/Economics-and-Freedom) *by [Mark
    Thornton](/media/authors/288/Mark-Thornton)*
-   [The Central Bankers](/media/8244/The-Central-Bankers) *by [Mark
    Thornton](/media/authors/288/Mark-Thornton)*
-   [Money-Printing is Doomed to
    Failure](/media/8243/MoneyPrinting-is-Doomed-to-Failure) *by [Mark
    Thornton](/media/authors/288/Mark-Thornton)*
-   [The War on Drugs: Who is
    Winning?](/media/8242/The-War-on-Drugs-Who-is-Winning) *by [Mark
    Thornton](/media/authors/288/Mark-Thornton)*
-   [The Era of Free Banking](/media/8241/The-Era-of-Free-Banking) *by
    [Mark Thornton](/media/authors/288/Mark-Thornton)*
-   [The U. S. Dollar Empire](/media/8240/The-U-S-Dollar-Empire) *by
    [Mark Thornton](/media/authors/288/Mark-Thornton)*

[**RSS Feed for
Video**](/media.xml "Subscribe to the RSS Feed")[](/media)

**Video**
---------

-   [Mozart Was a Red](/media/1248/Mozart-Was-a-Red) *by [Murray N.
    Rothbard](/media/authors/299/Murray-N-Rothbard)*
-   [Question and Answer Period](/media/8137/Question-and-Answer-Period)
    *by [Mises Institute](/media/authors/593/Mises-Institute)*
-   [War, Politics, and the Future of
    Peace](/media/8176/War-Politics-and-the-Future-of-Peace) *by [Ron
    Paul](/media/authors/392/Ron-Paul)*
-   [How U.S. Economic Warfare Provoked Japan's Attack on Pearl
    Harbor](/media/8174/How-US-Economic-Warfare-Provoked-Japans-Attack-on-Pearl-Harbor)
    *by [Robert Higgs](/media/authors/369/Robert-Higgs)*
-   [The Keynesian Architects of the U.S. Warfare
    State](/media/8172/The-Keynesian-Architects-of-the-US-Warfare-State)
    *by [Joseph T. Salerno](/media/authors/237/Joseph-T-Salerno)*
-   [Waging War with the Printing
    Press](/media/8170/Waging-War-with-the-Printing-Press) *by [Doug
    French](/media/authors/627/Doug-French)*
-   [The Gang of Four: Hitler, Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill and the
    Destruction of
    Europe](/media/8168/The-Gang-of-Four-Hitler-Stalin-Roosevelt-and-Churchill-and-the-Destruction-of-Europe)
    *by [Yuri N. Maltsev](/media/authors/467/Yuri-N-Maltsev)*
-   [Murray Rothbard and Revisionist
    History](/media/8166/Murray-Rothbard-and-Revisionist-History) *by
    [David Gordon](/media/authors/64/David-Gordon)*

"Only stilted pedants can conceive the idea that there are absolute
norms to tell what is beautiful and what is not. They try to derive from
the works of the past a code of rules with which, as they fancy, the
writers and artists of the future should comply. But the genius does not
cooperate with the pundit."

— Ludwig von Mises, in [Theory and
History](//mises.org/quotes.aspx?action=source&Source=Arts)

![LvMI](//images.mises.org/Theme/images/bf_shield.png) ![Ludwig von
Mises Institute](//images.mises.org/Theme/images/bf_lvmi.png)

518 West Magnolia Avenue • Auburn, Alabama 36832-4501 • Phone:
334.321.2100 • Fax: 334.321.2119\
 [Contact Us](/contact.aspx)•
[contact@mises.org](mailto:contact@mises.org?subject=Comment+or+Question+about+the%20Mises+Institute "Comments and Questions about the Mises Institute")
•
[•](mailto:webmaster@mises.org?subject=Comments+about+the+Mises.org+web+site "Comments about the Mises.org web site")[Site
Map](/sitemap.aspx) • [Open
Source](http://groups.google.com/group/misesdev) •

[![creativecommons.org](//images.mises.org/cc-a.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/)

![image](//www.googleadservices.com/pagead/conversion/1069969747/?label=_U6BCMuEgwIQ0-KZ_gM&guid=ON&script=0)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://mises.org/daily/2765
