[Matthias Nehlsen](/)
=====================

Software, Data and Stuff
------------------------

-   [RSS](/atom.xml "subscribe via RSS")

-   [Blog](/)
-   [Archives](/blog/archives)
-   [Reviews](/reviews)
-   [Reading Lists](/reading-lists)
-   [About](/about)

[](https://plus.google.com/100986586701798521209)

BirdWatch: AngularJS vs. ReactJS
================================

03/31/2014

**Summary:** In this article I will present a new version of the
BirdWatch application that uses
**[ReactJS](http://facebook.github.io/react/)** on the client side
instead of **[AngularJS](http://angularjs.org)**. Don’t worry if you
liked the previous AngularJS version - I do not intend to replace it.
Rather, I want to create another version of the client side web
application in order to get a better feeling for the pros and cons of
different frameworks and libraries. So think of it as something like the
**[TodoMVC](http://todomvc.com)** of reactive web applications. Well,
not quite yet, but feel free to write another client version for
comparison. EmberJS anyone? For this new version I have also rewritten
the barchart as a ReactJS component with integrated trend analysis and
no dependency on **[D3.js](http://d3js.org)**. Again, there is nothing
wrong with D3; I just like to try different approaches to the same
problem.

In this article I will not go into a lot of detail about the server side
of the BirdWatch application as there’s an **[article on
that](http://matthiasnehlsen.com/blog/2013/09/10/birdwatch-explained/)**
already. What you need to know is that there is a server side
application using **[Play Framework](http://www.playframework.com)**
that connects to the **[Twitter Streaming
API](https://dev.twitter.com/docs/streaming-apis)** and that subscribes
to a defined set of terms, meaning that it will retrieve all tweets
containing at least one of these terms, up to a limit of 1% of all
tweets at a given time^[1](#fn:1)^. Then there is a client side
JavaScript application that allows users to perform a live search inside
a stream of tweets, with realtime updates of the UI when new search
matches come in from Twitter. Here’s how that looks like. Click the
image to try out the application:

[![image](/images/bw_reactjs.png)](http://birdwatch.matthiasnehlsen.com)

Here’s an animated architectural overview, mostly meant as a teaser for
the previous article which describes the server side of the application
in detail. You can click it to get to that article:

[![image](/images/bw_expl_anim.gif)](http://matthiasnehlsen.com/blog/2013/09/10/birdwatch-explained/)

This has all worked really nicely with AngularJS for a couple of months.
Now let’s see if we can build the same thing with
**[ReactJS](http://facebook.github.io/react/)** on the client side.

Why would one choose ReactJS over AngularJS?
--------------------------------------------

In the current version of BirdWatch, AngularJS decides when to figure
out if the data model changes so that it can determine when to re-render
the UI. These calls can happen at any time, so they need to be
idempotent ^[2](#fn:2)^. That requirement has been met, any call to the
crossfilter service for data is indeed itempotent, but there’s a catch:
every call to get data is potentially expensive, and I’d rather avoid
unnecessary calls to the
**[crossfilter](http://square.github.io/crossfilter/)** service. Instead
I want to decide when the client UI is rendered by actively triggering
the render process. That way I have full control when and how often the
UI renderer is fed with new data.

As discussed in my recently published
**[article](http://matthiasnehlsen.com/blog/2014/01/24/scala-dot-js-and-reactjs/)**,
ReactJS may also be a better fit when working with immutable data. That
is not a concern in the current version of BirdWatch, but it may well be
an issue in the future.

Implementing the existing functionality with ReactJS
----------------------------------------------------

There are four main areas of functionality in the application:

-   **Search:** The user can start a search by entering the terms into
    the search bar, which will refresh the data and establish a
    **[Server Sent Events (SSE)](http://dev.w3.org/html5/eventsource/)**
    connection to the server that will deliver search matches in real
    time. At the same time previous matches are retrieved and merged
    with the real time results.

-   **Rendering of tweets:** Different sort orders of tweets are
    displayed in a list of what I call tweet cards. In AngularJS,
    directives handle the abstraction of one such tweet nicely.

-   **Pagination:** The application loads many more tweets than can be
    displayed on one page (with 5000 tweets being the default). The
    AngularJS version implements this with a modified subset of the
    **[AngularUI-Bootstrap
    project](http://angular-ui.github.io/bootstrap/)**.

-   **Charts:** Different visualizations are rendered on the page. At
    the core, D3 does this for us. In the AngularJS version, relatively
    thin wrappers make
    **[directives](http://docs.angularjs.org/guide/directive)** out of
    these charts that get wired data and that re-render when the data
    changes.

-   **Bookmarkability:** users can bookmark a search and come back to it
    later, send it to friends, tweet about it or whatever. AngularJS
    provides the
    **[$locationProvider](http://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/provider/$locationProvider)**
    for this.

Let’s go through these areas one by one.

Search
------

In this area, AngularJS and its two-way data-binding shine. The content
of the search input element is bound to a property on the **$scope**,
just like the button is bound to a function that is also part of the
**$scope** and that triggers a new search. ReactJS, on the other hand,
does not offer two-way binding out of the box. There are helpers to
achieve this, notably
**[ReeactLink](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/two-way-binding-helpers.html)**,
but I have not tried it. It also seems that it is generally discouraged.
In this case it was fairly trivial to achieve the functionality without
ReactJS; instead I am assigning the functionality using onclick for
triggering the search function, and jQuery to achieve the same when
enter is pressed inside the input field. AngularJS offers more of a full
framework solution for such problems, but I am okay with this solution
here.

Search
Button[react\_js.scala.html](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/603d4dfb85330e346afdf9241e36a62313eaa620/app/views/react_js.scala.html)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
~~~~

    <button class="btn btn-primary" type="button" onclick="BirdWatch.search()">

The button is plain HTML with an onclick handler. I have assigned the
*search* function to serve as the handler function, which lives in a
property of the global BirdWatch object. In addition to the click
handler for the button, I also wanted to be able to trigger a search
when pressing ENTER inside the search field. jQuery is perfect for that:

Handling Enter in Search
Field[app.js](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/react-js/src/app.js)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
2
3
4
5
~~~~

      $('#searchForm').submit(function (e) {
        BirdWatch.search();
        e.preventDefault();
        return false;
      });

Finally here is the function that triggers the search:

Function for triggering
search[app.js](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/react-js/src/app.js)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
~~~~

      BirdWatch.search = function () {
        var searchField = $("#searchField");
        BirdWatch.wordcount.reset();
        activePage = 1;
        BirdWatch.crossfilter.clear();
        BirdWatch.tweets.search(searchField.val(), $("#prev-size").val());
        searchField.focus();
      };

The above is plain old HTML / JavaScript / jQuery. You may think this to
be a rather old-fashioned way of doing it. But on the upside, no special
framework knowledge is required, and anyone who has done any web
development in the last decade can do this without a learning curve.
Alternatively, we could make a ReactJS component out of the search bar
and pass the the handler function to this component as part of the
**props** ^[3](#fn:3)^. In this simple case I don’t believe it is
necessary to create a component, but this would be the way to go about
it when more complex behavior is desired.

Rendering of tweets
-------------------

This is where it gets much more interesting. AngularJS renders the list
of tweets from the data model using **ng-repeat** like this:

ng-repeat in AngularJS
version[index.scala.html](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/app/views/index.scala.html)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
2
3
4
5
~~~~

    <!-- Tweet Cards inside frame -->
    <div class="col-lg-4" id="tweet-frame">
        <div class="tweetCard" data-ng-repeat="tweet in cf.tweetPage(currentPage, pageSize, sortModel)"
            data-tweet="tweet"></div>
    </div>

where *cf.tweetPage* is a function that delivers the data from the
crossfilter object. The application code has little control over when
this happens. It will certainly happen when explicitly calling
*$scope.$apply* and also when anything else happens that has any effect
on the data model, anywhere. This is what I meant when I said earlier
that this may not be the most desirable thing when this function call is
potentially expensive.

ReactJS works the other way round. The application instantiates a
component for the list of tweets that knows how to render itself, and it
will only subsequently do that when the application actively feeds it
new data. Let’s look at that in more detail. In the HTML, there is only
a single div without any special notation:

Tweet List Div in
ReactJS[react\_js.scala.html](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/app/views/react_js.scala.html)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
2
~~~~

        <!-- Tweet Cards inside frame -->
        <div class="col-lg-4" id="tweet-frame"></div>

Then in the component declaration, it looks as follows:

Tweet List Div in
ReactJS[tweetlist.js](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/react-js/jsx/tweetlist.js)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
~~~~

    /** Component for conditional rendering of retweet count inside Tweet */
    var RetweetCount = React.createClass({
        render: function() {
            if(this.props.count > 0) {
                return <div className="pull-right timeInterval">{numberFormat(this.props.count)} RT</div>
            }
            else return <div></div>;
        }
    });

    /** single Tweet component */
    var Tweet = React.createClass({
        render: function () { return (
            <div className="tweet">
                <span>
                    <a href={"http://www.twitter.com/" + this.props.t.user.screen_name} target="_blank">
                        <img className="thumbnail" src={this.props.t.user.profile_image_url} />
                    </a>
                </span>
                <a href={"http://www.twitter.com/" + this.props.t.user.screen_name} target="_blank">
                    <span className="username">{this.props.t.user.name}</span>
                </a>
                <span className="username_screen">&nbsp;&#64;{this.props.t.user.screen_name}</span>
                <div className="pull-right timeInterval">{fromNow(this.props.t.created_at)}</div>
                <div className="tweettext">
                    <div dangerouslySetInnerHTML= className=""></div>
                    <div className="pull-left timeInterval">{numberFormat(this.props.t.user.followers_count)} followers</div>
                    <RetweetCount count={this.props.t.retweet_count} />
                    <FavoriteCount count={this.props.t.favorite_count} />
                </div>
            </div>
        ); }
    });

    /** Tweet list component, renders all Tweet items (above) */
    var TweetList = React.createClass({
        render: function() {
            var tweetNodes = this.props.tweets.map(function (tweet, idx, arr) {
                return <Tweet t={tweet} key={idx} />;
            }.bind(this));
            return <div id="tweet-list">{tweetNodes}</div>;
        }
    });

    /** render BirdWatch components */
    var tweetListComp = React.renderComponent(<TweetList tweets={[]}/>, document.getElementById('tweet-frame'));
    var tweetCount = React.renderComponent(<TweetCount count={0}/>, document.getElementById('tweet-count'));

    BirdWatch.setTweetCount = function (n) { tweetCount.setProps({count: n}); };
    BirdWatch.setTweetList = function (tweetList) { tweetListComp.setProps({tweets: tweetList}); };

Notice the **TweetList** component close to the bottom. This component
itself has elements of the **Tweet** component type as child elements
which it generates inside its only method *render* by mapping data in
the array to individual elements. *Render*, by the way, is the only
method that a ReactJS component is required to have. In this particular
component, the child elements are generated by using the map function on
the props.tweet, which accordingly needs to be an array as otherwise the
JavaScript map function would not be available. In the mapper function,
a **Tweet** component is created for every element of the array, and
that element is passed to the Tweet component as **props**.

The Tweet component itself also has a *render* function in which it
creates a **div** holding the representation of a tweet. Dynamic data
for this comes from accessing the tweet object that was passed in the
TweetList component. Note that the code above is not regular JavaScript
but JSX, which allows writing a syntax fairly similar to HTML. This JSX
is cross-compiled into JavaScript during the build process. More
information on this build process can be found in the paragraph and in
the
**[README](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/tree/master/react-js)**.

The **Tweet** component then includes a **RetweetCount** component, to
which it passes the RT count as **props**. This component has
conditional logic in which it decides itself if it wants to return an
empty **div** or actual content. The same goes for the
**FollowersCount** component, which I have omitted here as it follows
the same principle.

Pagination
----------

Unlike in the AngularJS version, where I relied on additional projects,
I have implemented this from scratch with ReactJS. Here’s the entire
component:

Pagination
component[pagination.js](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/b9dc0b4cf19ec47c893aed27a690230dc882d1f8/react-js/jsx/pagination.js)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
~~~~

    /** Pagination component, allows selecting the current page in the Tweet list */
    var PaginationItem = React.createClass({
        setActive: function () {this.props.setPage(this.props.page)},
        render: function() {
            return <li className={this.props.active ? "active" : ""} onClick={this.setActive}><a>{this.props.page}</a></li>
        }
    });

    var Pagination = React.createClass({
        toggleLive: function() { this.props.toggleLive(); },
        handleFirst: function() { this.props.setPage(1); },
        handleLast: function() { this.props.setPage(this.props.numPages); },
        handleNext: function() { this.props.setNext(); },
        handlePrevious: function() { this.props.setPrev(); },

        render: function() {
            var numPages = Math.min(+this.props.numPages, 25);
            var paginationItems = _.range(1, numPages+1).map(function (p) {
                return <PaginationItem page={p} active={p==this.props.activePage} setPage={this.props.setPage} key={p} />;
            }.bind(this));
            return <ul className="pagination-mini">
                <li className={this.props.live ? "active" : ""}><a onClick={this.toggleLive}>Live</a></li>
                <li><a onClick={this.handleFirst}>First</a></li>
                <li><a onClick={this.handlePrevious}>Previous</a></li>
                {paginationItems}
                <li><a onClick={this.handleNext}>Next</a></li>
                <li><a onClick={this.handleLast}>Last</a></li>
            </ul>
        }
    });
    var pagination = React.renderComponent(<Pagination numPages={1} />, document.getElementById('pagination'));
    BirdWatch.setPagination = function (props) { pagination.setProps(props); };
    BirdWatch.setPaginationHandlers = function (handlers) { pagination.setProps(handlers); };

Once again, we have two components, one for each item and one that
combines the individual items. In the Pagination component, we first
determine the minimum of either the number of pages (passed in as
**props**) or 25 in order to render a maximum of 25 pages. Then we do a
map on this the resulting range (with the range being created by an
**[underscore](http://underscorejs.org)** function), rendering one
PaginationItem component for each of these pages. So far this is
comparable to the components we have already seen above. What is new
here is that the *handler functions* are also passed as **props** and
assigned by the component. The nice thing about this is that this way we
can also dynamically assign handler functions. We could just as well
call functions on the global application object inside the handlers, but
conceptually I find it cleaner to think about the component only ever
receiving props, without needing to know anything about the application
it is embedded in.

Bookmarkability
---------------

At first I did not really know how to achieve this feature using
ReactJS. I have seen examples using
**[Backbone](http://backbonejs.org)** and its
**[router](http://backbonetutorials.com/what-is-a-router/)**, which
would make sense for more complex applications. One such example is
**[this article](https://medium.com/react-tutorials/c00be0cf1592)** and
another one is **[this
article](http://webdesignporto.com/react-js-with-backbone-router-and-local-storage/)**.
For this application, introducing Backbone seemed like overkill though,
so I was looking for a simpler approach. Turns out achieving this is
super simple using **[jQuery](http://jquery.com)** and the plain old
**[DOM API](http://www.w3.org/DOM/)**. For the search function I had
already created a jQuery object:

searchField jQuery
object[app.js](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/react-js/src/app.js)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
~~~~

    var searchField = $("#searchField");

Then inside the search function, I simply set the
**window.location.hash** with a **[URI
encoded](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/encodeURIComponent)**
version of the search term:

setting location hash when
searching[app.js](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/react-js/src/app.js)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
~~~~

    window.location.hash = "/" + encodeURIComponent(searchField.val());

Then when loading the page, I read the location hash into the search
field and call *search()*, which reads the content of the search field
and triggers the search with whatever is in there:

trigger search on page
load[app.js](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch/blob/ca0ffd54795f26bcbfdcdf5e3e61ea6d0e2d1950/react-js/src/app.js)

~~~~ {.line-numbers}
1
2
~~~~

    searchField.val(decodeURIComponent(window.location.hash.substr(2)));
    BirdWatch.search();

Build system
------------

To round things off, I have configured a
**[grunt-based](http://gruntjs.com)** build system that automatically
**[transpiles](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Source-to-source_compiler)**
JSX into plain old JavaScript and then concatenates the files into a
single JavaScript file. I have also included tasks for
**[JsHint](http://www.jshint.com)** and **[Plato code
analysis](https://github.com/es-analysis/plato)** to improve code
quality. Ideally there should be additional tasks for a CSS preprocessor
such as **[LESS](http://lesscss.org)** and minification of HTML, CSS and
JavaScript files to achieve the best user experience possible, most
notably fast load times. Maybe I’ll get around to that at some point in
time. I should also do the same for the AngularJS version.

Building an SVG Bar Chart with ReactJS (without D3.js)
------------------------------------------------------

**[D3.js](http://d3js.org)** is an amazing technology and really great
visualizations have been built with it. However it also has a
considerably steep learning curve. I personally find ReactJS easier to
reason about because unlike D3.js it does not have the notion of
***update***. Instead, we always pass it the entire data and it will put
the changes into effect itself through an intelligent diffing mechanism
where it compares current and previous versions of a (fast) virtual DOM
and only puts the detected changes into effect in the (slow) actual DOM.
Now I thought it would be nice if this concept could aso be applied to
**[SVG (scalable vector
graphics)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalable_Vector_Graphics)** in
addition to HTML. Turns out the same principles apply, and accordingly I
found it fairly simple to re-build the bar chart and have ReactJS
instead of D3 create the SVG inside the
**[DOM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Object_Model)**. The
resulting code is much shorter than the previous D3 version despite a
lot of added functionality. The previous version was a simplistic bar
chart, whereas the new version has a built-in trend analysis using
**[regression-js](https://github.com/Tom-Alexander/regression-js)**, a
neat little regression analysis library. In this new chart each bar is
aware of its history and determines its trends using linear regression.
Here’s how that looks like:

![image](/images/react-barchart.png)

Each bar has two associated trend indicators, one to show recent
movements in the ranking and the other to show an overall trend of the
word occurrence. The trends are determined using a simple linear
regression, where the slope of the resulting function directly
translates into an upward or downward trend. I don’t have the time to go
into detail about the implementation of this chart today, but this topic
should make for an interesting article in the future.

Conclusion
==========

ReactJS nicely complements the rendering of the UI of the BirdWatch
application. From a bird’s-eye view, it is really not more than a
function that accepts data and that, as a side effect, effects a DOM
representation in line with the data provided. It does the rendering in
a very efficient way and it is low-maintenance; it does not require any
more attention than the call necessary to inform it about data changes.
I find its data flow model very easy to reason about, simpler in fact
than the multitude of concepts one needs to think about when building an
application with AngularJS. So far AngularJS has also worked really well
for this application, so I’d say both are suitable approaches to single
page web applications. For now I’m curious to know your opinion. You can
find the source code on
**[GitHub](https://github.com/matthiasn/BirdWatch)**. A live version is
available in two versions: using
**[ReactJS](http://birdwatch.matthiasnehlsen.com/)** and using
**[AngularJS](http://birdwatch.matthiasnehlsen.com/angular/#/)**.

Until next time, Matthias

Check out my **[reviews page](/reviews)** where I share my thoughts on
books and gadgets.

* * * * *

1.  The list of technical terms I use for the live demo under
    birdwatch.matthiasnehlsen.com easily fits into this cap, in which
    case the application will receive all these tweets. The term
    **Obama** also usually fits into this limit. The term **love** on
    the other hand doesn’t. If you were to download BirdWatch from
    GitHub, create a Twitter API key and replace the list of software
    terms with only the word **love**, I bet you will reach the 1% limit
    any second of the day. However not to worry, Twitter will still
    deliver at the rate limit. When I last tried it, it was about 4
    million tweets per day. Sure, you might lose tweets doing this, but
    there’s not need to worry when you are looking for popular tweets as
    they will appear time and time again as a retweet, making it highly
    unlikely to miss them over time. Only the current retweet count may
    lag behind when the last update as a retweet was
    dropped.[↩](#fnref:1)

2.  **Idempotent**: This basically means that it must be possible to
    call something multiple times without additional side-effects, if
    any at all. Idempotency, for example, is also essential in scenarios
    where some service guarantees an at-least-once delivery. In that
    case you don’t want to run into trouble (like wrongfully
    incrementing a counter) when that service delivers more than
    once.[↩](#fnref:2)

3.  **Props** in ReactJS refers to immutable data dynamically passed to
    a component. The component will then render itself according to the
    data it is fed. Functions, being first class in JavaScript, can also
    be passed as props. JavaScript does not actually know immutable data
    structures, but conceptionally we should treat any data passed to a
    component as immutable as it will make our component much easier to
    reason about. [↩](#fnref:3)

Posted by Matthias Nehlsen 03/31/2014

[Tweet](http://twitter.com/share)

\

\
 \

[« ElasticSearch 1.0.0 - Breaking
Changes](/blog/2014/02/16/elasticsearch-v1/ "Previous Post: ElasticSearch 1.0.0 - Breaking Changes")
[Play Framework, Server Sent Events and Internet Explorer
»](/blog/2014/06/09/play-sse-ie/ "Next Post: Play Framework, Server Sent Events and Internet Explorer")

Comments
========

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

![Gravatar of Matthias Nehlsen
](/images/mn2013.jpg "Gravatar of Matthias Nehlsen")

About Me
========

Hello everyone. My name is Matthias Nehlsen and I am exploring
functional programming, data visualization and real-time information
processing.

Recent Posts
============

-   [Weekly Update: PageSpeed Insights, optimizing Octopress & more
    Clojure](/blog/2014/09/08/weekly-update/)
-   [Weekly Update: Pomodoro, all-Clojure BirdWatch,
    Income](/blog/2014/09/03/weekly-update/)
-   [Weekly Update: AngularJS book, BirdWatch and Clojure, Web
    Components, Upstart and Play](/blog/2014/08/25/weekly-update/)
-   [Weekly Update: git vs brain fart, Octopress, Sony A7, my audio
    setup](/blog/2014/08/17/weekly-update/)
-   [Weekly Update: AngularJS book, Geo-Lookup,
    Reading](/blog/2014/08/10/weekly-update/)

GitHub Repos
============

-   [BirdWatch](https://github.com/matthiasn/birdwatch)

    Reactive web application using Play Framework 2.2 for consuming and
    visualizing live Tweets from the Twitter Streaming API.

-   [sse-chat](https://github.com/matthiasn/sse-chat)

    Chat example app using Server Sent Events plus REST calls. Client
    side implementations both in AngularJS and in React.

-   [sse-perf](https://github.com/matthiasn/sse-perf)

    Reactive web application using Play Framework 2.1 for load testing
    Server Sent Event streams (or other HTTP connections that deliver
    information in chunks).

-   [Clojure-Resources](https://github.com/matthiasn/Clojure-Resources)

    Compilation of useful links and resources for learning Clojure and
    ClojureScript

Subscribe
=========

Enter your email to receive updates

\

Copyright © 2014 - Matthias Nehlsen - Powered by
[Octopress](http://octopress.org)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://matthiasnehlsen.com/blog/2014/03/31/birdwatch-with-reactjs/
