-   [Home](/ "Go home")[search](/search "Search Medium")
-   [Collections](/collections "Collections")
-   [Sign in or Create an account](/m/signin "Sign in to Medium")

Medium site navigation

[![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/fit/c/64/64/0*JLg6Qc0eq-NqFKdr.jpeg "Jonathan Barronville")Jonathan
Barronville](/@jonathanmarvens "Go to the profile of Jonathan Barronville")
in [I. M. H. O.](/i-m-h-o "Go to I. M. H. O.")

10 min

Next in trending

### What it really means to be a “junior” developer.

#### Friday evening, I received an email from a buddy of mine who, right out of college (Rochester Institute of Technology), is working for a…

-   [![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/fit/c/64/64/0*JLg6Qc0eq-NqFKdr.jpeg "Jonathan Barronville")Jonathan
    Barronville](/@jonathanmarvens "Go to the profile of Jonathan Barronville")
    in [I. M. H. O.](/i-m-h-o "Go to I. M. H. O.")
-   10 min read

![image](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhMgAVAPAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAAyABUAAAIfhI+py+0Po5y02ouz3rz7D4biSJbmiabqyrbuC8dTAQA7)![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/fit/t/1200/504/0*rcuDIhM4tQ3uoWmz.jpeg)

Alan (Zach Galifianakis) & Tyler (Grant Holmquist), The Hangover Part
III, Warner Bros. Pictures

What it really means to be a “junior” developer.
================================================

* * * * *

Friday evening, I received an email from a buddy of mine who, right out
of college (Rochester Institute of Technology), is working for a very
promising and well funded startup doing C++ systems programming and
machine learning. Below is a small chunk of his email.

> One thing that bothers me at work dude is that although my co-workers
> are mostly all nice people, I feel as if I get the least respect for
> my work. I work with six engineers (making us a team of seven
> engineers). Of the six, one is Platform Architect, two are Senior
> Applications Engineers, and another is Software Architect (the other
> two are QA guys). Honestly, and I don’t wan’t this to sound arrogant,
> except for one of the Senior Applications Engineers, I actually find
> that I know a lot more than every one of these “senior” guys. Don’t
> get me wrong…they all got many years doing this, working on some
> important systems and all, but I’m more knowledgeable than them. Most
> of the time just because I’m the Junior Systems Engineer, my ideas get
> thrown out the window and my hard work is not appreciated…in all
> honesty, that pisses me off to the max. Sometimes I feel like maybe I
> should go back to doing freelance (especially since I’m out of college
> now).

That email is 80% of the reason why I felt it necessary to write this
post. 15% is from reading [this](http://medium.com/p/19784e23163b),
[this](http://ahmetalpbalkan.com/blog/8-months-microsoft), and
[this](http://nickdesaulniers.github.io/blog/2013/06/13/8-months-in-mozilla).
The last 5% is from reading
[this](http://heybigname.com/2013/01/21/how-to-become-a-better-developer-straight-talk).

I am a **junior developer**. My current job title may be just “Software
Developer”, but to the software industry, I am a junior developer. So
what does that really mean? I have seen **too many** descriptions of
what different folks feel is meaning of being a “junior” developer. I
have also noticed that junior developers (including me, at some point in
the past) associate a certain amount of **stigma** with the term. For
the past few months, I have had the opportunity to work in a team of
brilliant engineers building an awesome and rewarding product. Although
just for about 6 months so far, having worked in an actual software
team, I feel confident that I am now able to provide what I think is the
appropriate meaning of a junior developer.

Rather than coming up with a formal definition, I will give some
examples, from which you can derive the meaning. Okay…here we go.

**Disclaimer for my buddy:** I still love you bro. [:)].

* * * * *

The know-it-all.
----------------

I am willing to bet that 98% of us, junior developers, go through this
phase at some point. I am going to use an imaginary character, Jack, as
a way to better explain this.

As a young, enthusiastic, & passionate developer, Jack strives to be the
best at his job. He is curious about everything, so he is always
learning something new, whether it is a new programming language,
paradigm, design pattern, or technology. He now knows seven programming
languages. He knows how to write imperative, functional, event-driven,
and object-oriented programs. Jack not only knows how to write fabulous
factory methods, sexy singletons, delicious decorators, and prodigious
prototypes, he knows when to properly use them (or at least he thinks he
does).

Oh, and by the way, Jack also knows a ton about different environments,
like Node.js, Java, Haxe, ooc, and even the one that you pushed to your
private GitHub repository last night. Trust me, he knows it. OMG! How
could I forget? Jack writes assembly too.

Because of all of this knowledge, Jack begins to develop, what I would
like to call, a foolish sense of superiority. He now knows a ton more
than average Joe, and therefore, he is better qualified for Joe’s job.
And please do yourself a favor, never call Jack a “junior” developer, or
even worse, (uh oh, here it comes) a “cupcake”; if you do, please do not
be surprised when you have a crazy headache later that night because
Jack is sitting in his bedroom smacking a doll resembling you with a
tire iron.

* * * * *

The experienced.
----------------

> He who would learn to fly one day must first learn to walk and run and
> climb and dance; one cannot fly into flying.

Those are the amazing words of a great philosopher & poet, Friedrich
Wilhelm Nietzsche.

See, there is a difference between having a ton of knowledge and being
experienced. It took me a while to understand that, but the difference
is quite interesting I must say.

**Disclaimer:** I am still learning and adapting to a lot of this stuff
myself. I am **in no way** saying that these things do not apply to me
as well.

### Emotions.

![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/600/0*RiFva1FJMvu3IWCy.jpeg)

Pospiech at the Polish language Wikipedia [CC-BY-SA-3.0
([http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0))],
from Wikimedia Commons

The more experienced developer knows how to break the less experienced
in order to shape them. But…but…but WTH do you mean by that, Jonathan?
It is really time you stop with the brown-nosing! I am already getting
tired of it!

Okay, you really haz to calm down right now and listen.

One thing that sits right next to young, enthusiastic, and passionate is
what I have started to call “the staple”. You are said to have “the
staple”, in my dictionary, if, as a developer, you are too attached to
your technologies and productions. As the junior developer with these
characteristics, you spend an extensive amount of time perfecting your
code, thinking about all of the design patterns and principles that
apply, writing unit tests (often really useless ones), *et cetera*. At
some point, you finish and you are super duper confident about your
work, so you go ahead and hand it all over to the “senior” developer,
with a brilliant smile on your face of course. Then, to your surprise,
she tells you that a design pattern that you used was unnecessary, your
system is not horizontally scalable, and there is too much premature
optimization going on. The little guy inside of you begins to cry, but
you are strong, so you refuse to let her see it. You begin to wonder
where dolls and tire irons are sold. She then goes on to explain
herself. She tells you that, in a previous experience, the singleton
pattern that you used, was used for that same purpose, where some basic
dependency injection would have been a better fit, and thus left them
(her previous team) swimming in a pool of refactoring. She then explains
that writing to the server’s disk from your application, an application
that is supposed to be load balanced, automatically disqualifies it as a
good candidate for load balancing, because a file written to server 1's
disk will not be readable on servers 2 and 3. She also tells you that
the premature optimization of making all of your variable names one
character in length will only hurt you in the future as there are tools
for that exact purpose. Hmm…“maybe I do not need that doll after all”,
you say.

That is what I mean by breaking you in order to shape you. Not only did
you receive some expert criticism on your work, you learned a few new
things along the way.

Good read: [*The Number One Rule Of Programming Is Leave Emotion At The
Door*](http://thejuniordeveloper.blogspot.com/2009/10/number-one-rule-of-programming-is-leave.html).

### Design and process.

![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/600/0*wbSNsfJxKPeC_ldv.png)

By Cat, the Bob [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons

Before being employed by [Ai Squared](http://aisquared.com/), I was a
freelancer. I had an appreciation for well architected products, and I
had the foolish assumption that the stuff that I was building were well
architected…they were **far** from that. So what is good architecture?
That is one question that I am not yet qualified to answer, but, in a
few years, I will come back to tell you. Okay? Deal.

One thing that I can say (so far) though is that there are two things
that junior developers usually ignore that, in my humble opinion, are a
must for engineering well architected products. These two things are,
what I call, “design” and “process”. We all know what “design” usually
means, of course (hopefully), but what do I mean when I say “design”?
Design is, simply, thinking about something that you want to build
before you build it.

As junior developers, as backwards as it may sound, we have the habit of
building before thinking and only thinking as we build. Being a
freelancer, I was provided with tasks and left alone (well, mostly) to
accomplish them. Because of this, I would crank out [poorly designed]
code (minimum: 75 LOC/hour) for straight 15-20 hours…better than a goat
(haha, I find it funny that you did not know that goats code…\#smh). All
I had to make sure was that the client was happy and that their
requirements were met. As long as the poorly designed code produced the
output requested by the client, all was good and everyone was happy.

Okay, so what do you mean by “process” then? Process is a clearly
defined route to be taken in order to accomplish a task. This is where
project management, planning, and project management tools come into
play. Again, before being actually in a software team, I knew about many
project management tools, like [Trello](http://trello.com/),
[Redmine](http://redmine.org/), and [Sprint.ly](http://sprint.ly/). In
fact, I even used a couple of them, including Trello and Redmine.
However, I had no process, so I treated these powerful project
management tools like to-do lists (complete and incomplete type of
thing). I knew, in theory, what QA was, but I did not really understand
that process either.

I now have the opportunity to learn how to properly create processes.

### The overall *déjà vu* proficient and the overall *jamais vu* expert.

![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/800/0*v-u0lyaMUeYx18T-.png)

By Tkgd2007 [CC-BY-SA-3.0
([http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0))],
via Wikimedia Commons

There is nothing at work that I enjoy more than hearing my experienced
co-workers describe mistakes that they have made in the past, the
consequences of such mistakes, and what they learned. As a developer
with an aspiration of reaching their level some day, it gives me the
opportunity to skip a few mistakes that I would have otherwise made.

But Jonathan…your title! Okay, okay, allow me to explain.

The well-known expression “*déjà vu*” is a French expression literally
meaning “already seen”. Almost an antonym of this expression is “*jamais
vu*”, literally meaning “never seen”.

Many junior developers (including me of course) know folks with “Senior”
as a prefix or “Architect” as a suffix of their title whom we feel are
less knowledgeable (in terms of programming-related skills) than us. One
interesting characteristic of many of these folks though is that they
have been around for a long time, worked for many companies (not
necessarily), made many mistakes, learned from their mistakes, *et
cetera*. However, unlike us, they might not know every language,
environment, and/or technology out there. Instead what they do is they
make themselves experts in a few areas (usually one or two, **as far as
I have seen**), and instead of learning every language, environment,
and/or technology out there, they pick maybe one or two languages,
environments, and/or technologies, and make themselves **true** experts
in those.

What does it mean to be a **true** expert in a language, environment,
and/or technology? In my dictionary, a **true** expert in **anything**,
is simply someone who is an expert, by not only knowing and
understanding their domain at an expert level (inside and out, that is),
but through years of experimentation and making use of such expertise.
In other words, in my humble opinion, any developer with the time and
commitment can become an expert in, say, a language like C\# in maybe
about a year (keep reading, keep reading), but to become a **true**
expert like the honorable [Jon
Skeet](http://stackoverflow.com/users/22656/jon-skeet), it takes
**years**.

So what do you mean, Jonathan, by “overall *déjà vu* proficient”. I am
referring to the **true** experts. Their expertise may lie in only one
or two areas, but they have “already seen” many things in those areas.
They can build scalable systems, have a deep understanding of the
ecosystem, know the shortcuts that lead to disaster, know when to
optimize, *et cetera*. Woah! “scalable systems”…what is that thingy?
Well, see, **fortunately**, at the moment, we (junior developers) fall
under the “overall *jamais vu* expert” category. We may be experts
(notice the omission of “**true**”) in many different things, know how
to build systems, have an understanding of the ecosystem, and know many
shorcuts, but we (generally) have no idea how to scale the systems that
we build, our understanding of the ecosystem is quite shallow, the
shortcuts that we take are mostly never even properly evaluated, and we
spend a lot of time over-engineering and optimizing prematurely.

Why the rush, folks?
--------------------

![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/max/600/0*FiLrI1wrsrH7V-ld.gif)

By Fengalon [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons

There is no need to rush.

If there is one article that I would never remove from my bookmarks, it
has to be “[*Teach Yourself Programming in Ten
Years*](http://norvig.com/21-days.html)” by the amazing [Peter
Norvig](http://norvig.com/).

If you have not read it, go get yourself a cup of [Mott’s® Original 100%
Apple Juice](http://motts.com/products/1) (cause it is good for you and
of course since that is what I am drinking right now…[;p]), turn off the
TV, Punch Your Brother in the Face™ (okay…I never said that), navigate
to the article using the link above, and read it attentively.

* * * * *

Wait, I am puzzled…you never told me why being an “overall *jamais
vu*expert” developer is **fortunate**. After all, my friend, this is the
time of our lives when we can and are allowed to commit blunders, learn
from them and others with experience. Using that to our advantage (in a
good way of course) will only do us good.

* * * * *

Alright…I am done. The end.

Recommend

****

#### Written by

-   [![image](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/fit/c/190/190/0*JLg6Qc0eq-NqFKdr.jpeg "Jonathan Barronville")](/@jonathanmarvens "Go to the profile of Jonathan Barronville")

    ### [Jonathan Barronville](/@jonathanmarvens "Go to the profile of Jonathan Barronville")

    I fight bears.

    Follow

    Updated July 21, 2013

    Cover photo: Alan (Zach Galifianakis) & Tyler (Grant Holmquist), The
    Hangover Part III, Warner Bros. Pictures

#### Published in

-   [![Go to I. M. H.
    O.](https://d262ilb51hltx0.cloudfront.net/fit/c/160/160/1*x-1TDR8e_OSXNQPjPWXf5w.jpeg)](/i-m-h-o "Go to I. M. H. O.")

    ### [I. M. H. O.](/i-m-h-o "Go to I. M. H. O.")

    The Editorial Page

    FollowAlso in 4 collections



This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://medium.com/i-m-h-o/266acb772b4b
