### Advertisement

[](http://scienceblogs.com/)

Science Blogs
=============

Go to Select Blog... ScienceBlogs Home AardvarchaeologyAetiologyA Few
Things Ill ConsideredBrookhaven Bits & BytesBuilt on FactsCasaubon's
BookClass MCommon KnowledgeConfessions of a Science LibrarianDean's
CornerDeltoiddenialism blogDeveloping IntelligenceDiscovering Biology in
a Digital WorldDynamics of CatsEffect MeasureervEvolutionBlogEvolution
for EveryoneGreg Laden's BlogLife at the SETI InstituteLife LinesLive
from ESOF 2014Omni BrainPage 3.14PharyngulaRespectful
InsolenceSciencePunkSignificant Figures by Peter GleickStarts With A
BangStoatThe Corpus CallosumThe Pump HandleThe Weizmann WaveThoughts
from KansasUncertain PrinciplesUniverseUSA Science and Engineering
Festival: The BlogWorld's FairZooillogix2010 World Science Festival
BlogA Blog Around The ClockAdventures in Ethics and ScienceA Good
PoopAll of My Faults Are Stress RelatedAngry ToxicologistApplied
StatisticsArt of Science LearningA Vote For ScienceBasic Concepts in
SciencebioephemeraBlogging the OriginChaotic UtopiaChristina's LIS
RantCognitive DailyCulture DishDeep Sea NewsDispatches from the Creation
WarsDot PhysicsDr. Joan Bushwell's Chimpanzee
RefugeEruptionsevolgenEvolving ThoughtsFraming ScienceGalactic
InteractionsGene ExpressionGenetic FutureGood Math, Bad MathGreen
GabbroGuilty PlanetIntegrity of ScienceIntel ISEFLaelapsLiving the
Scientific Life (Scientist, Interrupted)Mike the Mad BiologistMixing
MemoryMolecule of the DayMyrmecosNeuron
CultureNeuronticNeurophilosophyNeurotopiaNot Exactly Rocket
ScienceObesity PanaceaObservations of a NerdOf Two MindsOn Becoming a
Domestic and Laboratory GoddessOscillatorPhoto SynthesisPure
PedantryRetrospectacle: A Neuroscience BlogRevolutionary Minds Think
TankScience + SocietyScience After SunclipseScience is
CultureScienceOnline 2010: The BlogScience To LifeSciencewomenSeed/MoMA
SalonSee Jane ComputeShifting BaselinesSignoutSpeakeasy ScienceSpeaking
Science 2.0Stranger FruitSuperbugTerra SigillataTetrapod ZoologyThe
Blogger SAT ChallengeThe Book of TrogoolThe Cheerful OncologistThe
Examining Room of Dr. CharlesThe Frontal CortexThe IntersectionThe
Island of DoubtThe LoomThe Primate DiariesThe Quantum PontiffThe
Questionable AuthorityThe Rightful Place ProjectThe ScienceBlogs Book
ClubThe Scientific ActivistThe Scientific IndianThe Thoughtful AnimalThe
Voltage GateThus Spake ZuskaTomorrow's TableTranscription and
TranslationWalt at RandomWe BeastiesWhite Coat Underground

Search National Geographic
--------------------------

Search nationalgeographic.com Submit

-   [Last 24 Hrs](/last-24-hours)
-   [Life Science](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/life-science/)
-   [Physical
    Science](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/physical-science/)
-   [Environment](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/environment/)
-   [Humanities](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/humanities/)
-   [Education](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/education/)
-   [Politics](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/politics/)
-   [Medicine](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/medicine/)
-   [Brain &
    Behavior](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/brain-and-behavior/)
-   [Technology](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/technology/)
-   [Information
    Science](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/information-science/)
-   [Jobs](http://scienceblogs.com/channel/jobs/)

[Good Math, Bad Math](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/)
========================================================

[Zippers: Making Functional “Updates” Efficient](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2010/01/13/zippers-making-functional-upda/)
=============================================================================================================================

![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d91cbc789ef67801e927e627a583b5a4?s=58&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D58&r=G)Posted
by [Mark C.
Chu-Carroll](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/author/goodmath/ "Posts by Mark C. Chu-Carroll")
on January 13, 2010

[(19)](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2010/01/13/zippers-making-functional-upda/#comments "Comment on Zippers: Making Functional “Updates” Efficient")

More »

![image](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f0/Zipper_animated.gif)

In the Haskell stuff, I was planning on moving on to some monad-related\
 stuff. But I had a reader write in, and ask me to write another\
 post on data structures, focusing on a structured called a\
 *zipper*.

A zipper is a remarkably clever idea. It’s not really a single data\
 structure, but rather a way of building data structures in functional\
 languages. The first mention of the structure seems to be [a paper\
 by Gerard Huet in
1997](http://www.st.cs.uni-saarland.de/edu/seminare/2005/advanced-fp/docs/huet-zipper.pdf),
but as he says in the paper, it’s likely that this was\
 used before his paper in functional code — but no one thought to
formalize it\
 and write it up. *(In the original version of this post, I said the
name of the guy who first wrote about zippers was “Carl Huet”. I have
absolutely no idea where that came from – I literally had his paper **on
my lap** as I wrote this post, and I still managed to screwed up his
name. My apologies!)*

It also happens that zippers are one of the rare cases of data
structures\
 where I think it’s *not* necessarily clearer to show code. The concept
of\
 a zipper is very simple and elegant – but when you see a zippered tree\
 written out as a sequence of type constructors, it’s confusing, rather\
 than clarifying.

The basic idea of a zipper is to give you a way of efficiently working
with data\
 structures in a functional language. There are a lot of cases where in
an imperative\
 language, there’s some basic operation which is cheap and simple in the
imperative\
 language, because it’s performed by an in-place update. But in a
functional language,\
 you can’t update a field of a data structure: instead, you have to
create a new copy of the structure with the altered\
 field.

For example, consider the list `[a b c d e f g]`. Implemented\
 as a cons-list, it’s a list of 7 cons-cells. Suppose you wanted\
 to replace “e” with “q”. In an imperative language, that’s no problem:
just\
 do a set-car! of the 5th cell. In a functional language, you would\
 need to create a new list with “q” instead of\
 “e”. You could re-use the common tail `[f g]`, but you would need\
 to re-create the other 5 cells: you’d need to create a new cell to\
 attach “q” to `[f g]`. Then you’d need to create a new\
 cell to connect “d” to `[q f g]`. And so on.

That makes the functional program much slower than the imperative one.\
 If you’ve got a data structure that conceptually changes over time, and
you’re going to make lots of changes,\
 the cost of doing it functionally can become very high, because of all
of the copying\
 you do instead of mutating a data structure.

In general, it’s very hard to get around that. You can’t update in
place\
 in a functional language (at least, not without some serious
cleverness, either\
 in your code (like monads), you language (like linear types), or your
compiler).\
 But for many applications, there’s some notion\
 of a *focus point* – that is, a particular key point where changes\
 happen — and you can build structures where updates *around the focus*\
 can be performed efficiently.

For example, if you’re building a text editor, you’ve got the point\
 where the cursor is sitting – and the changes all happen around the
cursor.\
 The user might type some characters, or delete some characters – but it
always\
 happens around the cursor.

What a zipper does is take a data structure, and unfold it around a
focal\
 point. Then you can make changes at the focal point very quickly –
about as\
 quickly as an in-place update in an imperative language.

The idea of it is a lot like a gap-buffer. Right now, I’m actually
working\
 on a text-editor. I’m writing it using a gap-buffer. Conceptually, an\
 edit-buffer is one continuous sequence of characters. But if you
represent it\
 as a continuous sequence of characters, every insert is extremely
expensive.\
 So what you do is split it into two sub-sequences: one consisting of
the\
 characters *before* the cursor point, and one consisting of the\
 characters *after* the cursor point. With that representation,\
 inserting a character at the cursor point is O(1). Moving by one
character is\
 also O(1). Moving by N characters is O(N). With various improvements,
you can\
 do much better than that – but the key bit is that split between before
the\
 focus point and after it.

A zipper is a tree or graph-based version of a similar idea. For this\
 discussion, I’ll describe it in terms of trees; the graph version is
more complicated,\
 but you should be able to get the idea from seeing how it works on
trees. The\
 idea is that you take the tree structure, and you split it around a
focus. You’re focused on some node in the\
 tree. You keep track of a set of nodes that come *before* you, and a\
 set of nodes that come *after* you – those are basically like the\
 pre-gap and post-gap regions of a gap buffer. But because you’re
working in a\
 tree, you need a bit more information: you need to know the *path*
from\
 the root of the tree down to the current node.

It’s called a zipper because what you do to create this pre-focus,
path,\
 and post-focus bits of the structure is *unzip* the tree. For example,\
 look at the tree below. It’s a representation of a string of text
represented\
 by a tree. In this particular tree, all of the data is stored in the
leaves.\
 The internal nodes contain metadata, which I haven’t shown in the
diagram.

![i-769e4ed7fed63a6d47a10f9112e12f1b-string-tree.png](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/wp-content/blogs.dir/476/files/2012/04/i-769e4ed7fed63a6d47a10f9112e12f1b-string-tree.png)

Now, suppose I want to put the focus on “mno”. To do that, I climb down\
 the tree, *unzipping* as I go. I start at the root, node N1. Then I go\
 right. So I put N1 and its left subtree into the left-context of my\
 zipper-tree, and add “Right at N1″ to the path. That puts the focus at
N3. To\
 get to “mno” from N3, I need to go left. So I put N3 and its right
child into\
 the right context, and add “Left at N3″ to the path. Now the focus is
at N4.\
 To get to “mno”, I need to go right: so I put N4 and its left child
into the\
 left context, and add “Right at N4″ to the path. Now I’ve got the focus
set\
 where I want it at “mno”; and I’ve got right and left contexts.

![i-3f0252ef943a425254d267d10993ef22-string-tree-zippered.png](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/wp-content/blogs.dir/476/files/2012/04/i-3f0252ef943a425254d267d10993ef22-string-tree-zippered.png)

With the zipper, you can make all sorts of changes very easily at the\
 focus. Suppose I want to change the focus node, by inserting some text.
I can\
 do that functionally, without actually changing anything, by creating a
new\
 zipper tree which is identical to the old one, but which changes the
value of\
 the focus node – that is, if I were to add “123″ right after “mno”, I
could do\
 it by creating a new focus node “mno123″, with the same path, left, and
right\
 contexts. It takes minimal extra memory to create the copy, because I
can\
 re-use the path and the contexts.

I could also add new children nodes. Suppose that instead of adding\
 “123″ to the focus, I want to keep each leaf containing three
characters.\
 could replace the focus with a new node, N5, which had children “mno”\
 and “123″. I could re-use the “mno” node, and the path, left, and
right\
 contexts.

![i-27e8c483c718300b986591cca3fcca8b-string-tree-zippered-and-edited.png](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/wp-content/blogs.dir/476/files/2012/04/i-27e8c483c718300b986591cca3fcca8b-string-tree-zippered-and-edited.png)

That’s the beauty of the zipper: most operations can be in terms of
local\
 changes, re-using most of the structure. If we were using a standard
tree,\
 then to add a new node in the position of “mno”, we would need to
create\
 copies of N4, N3, and N1; instead, we only need to create the one new\
 node.

Doing other things isn’t that difficult either. Suppose we wanted to
move\
 the focus to “pqr”. We’d need to shift the focus from “mno” to N3, then
to N3,\
 and then to “pqr”. To get from “mno” to N4, we take the last step off
of the\
 path – which says we went right at N4 – so we set the focus to N4, and\
 re-establish “mno” as its right child. So the focus would be N4, with
“jkl” as\
 its left child, and “mno” as its right child. To get from N4 to N3, we
unroll\
 another step of the path: since we went left at N3, that means that N3
is the\
 new focus, with N4 as its left child. Then we’d go down to the right
from N3,\
 so we’d add “right at N3″ to the path, and “pqr” would be the new
focus.\
 Moving the focus like that is a tad more difficult than just
traversing\
 non-zipper tree, but it’s not significantly slower – and it makes the
edits\
 much, *much* faster.

So why is it harder to code? Because when we’re dealing with trees,
we’re pretty much always dealing with balance. And balance *isn’t* a
local property. No matter which kind of tree you use – red/black, 2/3,
AVL – you might need to climb up the tree to do the balance maintenance.
That mangles the simple zipper.

You’ve got two choices. One is to re-balance\
 the tree immediately. You can definitely do that. For\
 example, if you think of how you do a re-balance in\
 a red-black tree, you climb up the tree doing fixes until you’ve got
things rebalanced. You can definitely do that – by using the zipper to
move around the tree. But a big part of the point of the zipper is to
keep operations local, and the re-balancing is not a\
 local operation. Much of the time, you can do things\
 locally, but sometimes you’ll be stuck re-zipping as you move the focus
up the tree fixing the balance; in\
 the worst case, you need to re-zip the entire tree, all the way to the
root.

The alternative is something called *scarring*. You put marks in the
tree called scars that identify places where you made changes that could
trigger a rebalance. (Or more generally,\
 in places where you made an edit that could have violated some
invariant of the data structure.) You don’t do the fix immediately – you
just mark it with\
 the scar, and then at some point, whenever it makes sense for your
application, you go back to the scars, and fix the tree. (Scaring can
also have a more general meaning, which involves memorizing certain
paths through\
 the tree, so that you can make changes at the leave, then a few steps
up, then back at the leaf. It’s a similar concept; in both forms of
scarring, you’re optimizing to reduce the cost of zipping up and down
the tree. )

Either way, it gets a bit more complicated – and when you look at the
code\
 for a zipper, the re-balancing/invariant fixing has a tendency to
dominate the complexity\
 of the code. The zipper itself is so simple and so elegant that it just
disappears under\
 the weight of tree-balancing.

[(19)](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2010/01/13/zippers-making-functional-upda/#comments "Comment on Zippers: Making Functional “Updates” Efficient")

More »

Comments
--------

1.  [\#1](#comment-23719 "comment permalink") [Ricardo
    Herrmann](http://www.herrmann.eti.br)
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/56ee33ffa98e72cbe3f2b252dd494cc7?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 13, 2010

    Don’t forget mentioning that “[The Derivative of a Regular Type is
    its Type of One-Hole
    Contexts](http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~ctm/diff.pdf)“. Who said
    programmers don’t need to know Calculus ?
    ![;-)](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)
    That would also make a good related post (hint, hint).

2.  [\#2](#comment-23720 "comment permalink") [Ricardo
    Herrmann](http://www.herrmann.eti.br)
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/56ee33ffa98e72cbe3f2b252dd494cc7?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 13, 2010

    Here are some more good posts on ADT differentiation:

    -   [Finite Differences of
        Types](http://blog.sigfpe.com/2009/09/finite-differences-of-types.html)
    -   [Differentiation of Datastructures for Non-Functional
        Programmers](http://homepage.mac.com/sigfpe/Computing/diff.html)
    -   [Derivatives of
        Types](http://caffeinatedcode.wordpress.com/2008/10/22/functional-pearls-25-derivatives-of-types/)

    Which simply means there’s no need to be smart about the
    construction of zippers.

3.  [\#3](#comment-23721 "comment permalink") MPL
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/656078ed08bdbf5f090fc6808179401c?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 13, 2010

    I heard the structure of zippers compared to the structure of a
    recursive computation on a tree. There are downward pointing nodes
    corresponding to the parameters that would be active in the local
    context, with upwards nodes (so to speak) representing the return
    path. Viewed in the right way, with a bit of mental stretching, you
    could see a zipper as a sort of manipulable continuation. Other
    zipper-like structures can supposedly be constructed in a similar
    manner. I guess they make a good example of the code/data duality.

    Of course, balanced trees and zippers are always going to be
    slightly at odds, like you said, because zippers try to optimize
    local access, while balanced trees try to optimize global access. If
    insertions/edits are not locally clustered, a zipper might not make
    sense at all.

4.  [\#4](#comment-23722 "comment permalink") Ørjan Johansen
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a7cff0934335ff3c0ad6955e13d99f2b?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    MPL: You beat me to the remark about continuations. Actually, I
    think it’s easier to view continuations as zippers – isn’t that what
    a call stack is, the unzipped “after” part of an ongoing
    computation.

    Oleg Kiselyov also did the reverse, implementing zippers in a
    completely generic way as (delimited) continuations, at
    [http://okmij.org/ftp/Computation/Continuations.html\#zipper](http://okmij.org/ftp/Computation/Continuations.html#zipper)\
     Now that requires mental stretching. I won’t pretend to understand
    it.

5.  [\#5](#comment-23723 "comment permalink") MPL
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/656078ed08bdbf5f090fc6808179401c?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    Oooh, that looks like great fun, thanks for the link. I’ve been
    trying to learn Haskell lately (perverse or not, I like starting at
    the hard end).

    Reading about zippers and continuations were what made me finally
    understood the lisp saying that “data is code and code is data” (in
    a deeper way than “sexps are made of pairs”): the data reflects past
    computations, and guides future ones. At its best (map, foldr,
    zippers), this sort of thinking can produce beautiful things.

6.  [\#6](#comment-23724 "comment permalink") ja
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ddbcfa60d3143c832ff484fbe194354c?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    Actually, balanced trees and zippers don’t have to be at odds. In
    fact, fingers (as in finger trees) are just zippers without holes!

    The 2-3 finger tree view designed by Hinze & Paterson has two
    fingers, one at each end. Fingers can actually be located anywhere
    in many types of tree, including AVL trees. See, for instance, Brown
    & Tarjan’s “A fast merging algorithm”, especially the
    Joe-Versus-the-Volcano-esque Figure 7 (at the end of the report):

    [“A fast merging algorithm” by Brown &
    Tarjan](ftp://reports.stanford.edu/www/TR/CS-TR-77-625.html)

    Brown & Tarjan do go to some effort to rebalance the AVL tree, but
    2-3 finger trees show that it is possible to maintain balance
    without working quite so hard.

    [Joe Versus the
    Volcano](http://www.joeversusthevolcano.com/lightning.html)

7.  [\#7](#comment-23728 "comment permalink") Federico
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4aac499fafdb5e019d22ed857e731d2f?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    Thanks so much for the post !! As always a very clear explanation.

8.  [\#8](#comment-23730 "comment permalink") [Daniel
    Sobral](http://dcsobral.blogspot.com)
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6d43da5df0e52fc31c55e6a227bb23f4?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    That actually misses one of the most important uses of zippers,
    which is when one needs to “move” in both directions.

    Functional data structures usually support only one-way moving. One
    can only go down on trees, never up to the parent, only right on
    lists, and so on. This makes it possible to maximize reuse of such
    structures when making modifications.

    Some algorithms, however, need to be able to go in more than one
    direction. For instance, XPath queries may refer to the parent of a
    node.

    Zipper then provides a way to enable traversal of immutable
    structures both ways, in an efficient manner.

9.  [\#9](#comment-23731 "comment permalink") [Ricardo
    Herrmann](http://www.herrmann.eti.br)
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/56ee33ffa98e72cbe3f2b252dd494cc7?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    Here are some more good posts on ADT differentiation:

    -   [Finite Differences of
        Types](http://blog.sigfpe.com/2009/09/finite-differences-of-types.html)
    -   [Differentiation of Datastructures for Non-Functional
        Programmers](http://homepage.mac.com/sigfpe/Computing/diff.html)
    -   [Derivatives of
        Types](http://caffeinatedcode.wordpress.com/2008/10/22/functional-pearls-25-derivatives-of-types/)

    Which simply means there’s no need to be smart about the
    construction of zippers.

10. [\#10](#comment-23732 "comment permalink") [Eugene
    Day](http://eclectologia.blogspot.com)
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d26e318def96a0a0ba59f2fe941ed0c4?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    I’ve lurked at your blog for a long time and really like it,
    although I’m not much of a programmer, I really enjoyed the stuff on
    chaos. Control systems and Operations research are my specialties.

    I’m starting a semi-formal, casually peer reviewed science blog, and
    I’m seeking qualified reviewers. Anyone who would like to drop by is
    welcome.

    eclectologia(at)gmail.com

11. [\#11](#comment-23733 "comment permalink") [Brendan
    Miller](http://catphive.net)
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/16cb3584428bed67b10a33f628d5b009?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    I love your data structure posts! Keep up the good work please. It’s
    so rare to see blogs discussing computer sciency issues.

    99% of the programming blogs out there just don’t touch anything
    related to data structure or algorithms… Which makes me said,
    because that’s really the most fun and intellectually challenging
    aspect of programming.

    I’m also glad you didn’t make this a Haskell specific post. While
    I’ve used functional languages like ML and Scheme, I haven’t tried
    Haskell yet, so some of the Haskell specific issues tend to go over
    my head.

12. [\#12](#comment-23735 "comment permalink") Bard Bloom
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5184b5552357a6c79034c971ac0eb11?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    Nice discussion! Thank you. I’m kind of far from functional
    languages anymore, but it’s good to see your articles on them.

13. [\#13](#comment-23736 "comment permalink") [Leon P
    Smith](http://blog.melding-monads.com)
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e62561db40e46118628b31cba87840d6?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    There is another approach to persistent data structures than what is
    used by purely functional languages, as detailed in [Making Data
    Structures Persistent](http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=12142)
    by Driscoll, Sarnak, Sleator, and Tarjan. (also available
    [here](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~sleator/papers/making-data-structures-persistent.pdf))

14. [\#14](#comment-23738 "comment permalink") augustss
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7c0ea0055b84020bf860c05f53ba53d5?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    Huet’s given name is Gérard.

15. [\#15](#comment-23739 "comment permalink") solrize
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f3cb0908274c7ca0edb59d99bdbbd202?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 14, 2010

    You may have been thinking of Carl Hewitt, who worked on the
    so-called “Actor model” of programming.

16. [\#16](#comment-23741 "comment permalink") andreas
    ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7a4c70335bd02dc76b0e768c564c3572?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 15, 2010

    Nice and well written post. I found a small typo. The First N3 in\
     “We’d need to shift the focus from “mno” to N3, then to N3, and
    then to “pqr”.” should be N4 as your saying in the next sentence.

17. [\#17](#comment-23742 "comment permalink") MikeRo
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/80d1c226cec9298f507edb0f2eb13a90?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 15, 2010

    With languages like F\#, we can “escape” pure-FP as desired – so I’m
    wondering when I have the choice, to use a pure-FP DS with zippers,
    or use “mutable” when necessary.\
     The question to me is, how does the “hole context” of a zipper
    effect concurrent operations on the same DS? Seems to me that you’d
    need some kind of “zipper manager” that had global state or a way to
    rewind operations (like managing cache coherency) to get the right
    answer at the end, which is probably more complicated than non-FP
    approaches to concurrency.

18. [\#18](#comment-23743 "comment permalink") Ørjan Johansen
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a7cff0934335ff3c0ad6955e13d99f2b?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 16, 2010

    MikeRo: It is my very vague understanding (mostly from just reading
    the abstract) that the second article in that Kiselyov link I gave
    above is sort of about such “zipper managers”, and that indeed
    things get very complicated when updating at two or more different
    locations simultaneously. (I’m not sure if he supports actual
    concurrent updates or just interleaved sequential ones.)

    One thing I believe you lose immediately when using almost *any*
    mutability in your data structure is the ability to keep old
    versions of the data structure hanging around, e.g. for undo.

19. [\#19](#comment-23745 "comment permalink") MPL
    ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/656078ed08bdbf5f090fc6808179401c?s=50&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D50&r=G)

    January 18, 2010

    @14,15

    Skimming the Kiselyov link, it sounds like he’s arguing that you can
    construct several different solutions for dealing with the data
    concurrently.

    Having a way to rewind/undo operations actually comes free with
    immutable/functional data structures: just keep a reference to the
    previous version (well, not free. Eventually the garbage collector
    will send you a bill). If you don’t need to merge the results back
    together (which is entirely plausible in some cases), then nothing
    else has to be done.

    If you do need to get all the processes working on the same data
    again, there’s a few options. You can always do the basic thing and
    take out locks on the data: this is no better or worse than the
    mutable solution.

    The sophisticated, concurrent shared update solutions are
    complicated. But that problem is *inherently* complicated, so that’s
    not a big loss either. They are all, essentially, ways of merging
    two sets of updates together.

    The *huge* advantage of these functional data structures is that
    although it may be difficult to get something that works
    concurrently at all, it is much harder to get random nonsense
    errors, like carelessly done mutable shared data structures can do
    all too easily.

    Interestingly enough, back when I was still following the F\#/.Net
    chatter, there were rumors of adding ways to make it impossible to
    mutate data structures, so you could enforce some of the functional
    properties. The motivation being concurrent programing, where
    mutable data structures can cause havoc.

The site is currently under maintenance and will be back shortly. New
comments have been disabled during this time, please check back soon.

Search This Blog
----------------

Search for:

Subscribe
---------

Subscribe via:

-   [RSS2](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/feed/)
-   [Atom](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/feed/atom/)
-   Subscribe via a feed reader

No Widgets Yet!
---------------

It looks like you haven’t added any widgets to this sidebar yet. To
customize this sidebar, go [add
some](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/wp-admin/widgets.php)!

* * * * *

© 2006-2014 ScienceBlogs LLC. ScienceBlogs is a registered trademark of
ScienceBlogs LLC. All rights reserved.

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005368&cv=2.0&cj=1)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2010/01/13/zippers-making-functional-upda/
