-   [Home](http://kukuruku.co)
-   [Sign in](#)
-   [Hubs](http://kukuruku.co/hubs/)
-   [Stream](http://kukuruku.co/stream/)

-   [**Twitter](https://twitter.com/kukurukuco)
-   [**Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/kukurukuco)

☰ [Sign in](http://kukuruku.co/login/)

Teaching the File System to Read
================================

By [kmu1990](http://habrahabr.ru/users/kmu1990/), [Original
Source](http://habrahabr.ru/company/spbau/blog/224589/)

What I’m Going to Tell You About
--------------------------------

In [the previous
article](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel)
we constructed the environment needed to get familiar with the kernel.
Then we took a look at loadable kernel modules and wrote a simple “Hello
World!”. Finally, we wrote a simple and useless file system. Now it’s
time to go on.\
 \
 The main aim of this article is to teach the file system to read from
disk. For now it will read the operating information only (the super
block and index nodes).\
 \
 Doesn’t seem like much, eh? The thing is that in this post we’ll have
to define the structure of our file system – the way it will be stored
on disk. Besides, we’ll also get familiar with SLAB and RCU. All of this
will require some explanations – a lot of words and little code.
Therefore, the post will be quite long. \
 \

A Boring Beginning
------------------

Our file should be simple, so it will be stored on disk the following
way: \
 \

![Teaching the File System to
Read](/mod_pagespeed_static/1.JiBnMqyl6S.gif "Teaching the File System to Read")\
 Let’s start from the end:\
 \

-   data blocks – blocks of useful data, i.e. the content of files and
    folders;
-   table of inodes – the table of index nodes. The amount of index
    nodes is determined when formatting. We store them in the continuous
    sequence of blocks;
-   free inodes – a bitmap of free/backlogged index nodes. It occupies 1
    block;
-   free blocks – a bitmap of free/backlogged blocks. It occupies 1
    block as well;
-   super block – the super block of our file system. It stores the
    block size, the number of blocks in the table of index nodes and the
    number of the index node of the root folder;

\
 The same disk format is used in other files systems as well. For
instance, a [block
group](http://www.nongnu.org/ext2-doc/ext2.html#DEF-BLOCK-GROUPS) in
**ext2/3** has a similar structure, but **ext2/3** works with several
such groups while we’ll work with one only. Such format is considered to
be out-of-date and new file systems step away from it. For example,
[btrfs](http://lwn.net/Articles/342892/) uses a much more interesting
scheme that provides many advantages over *ext* family. But let’s get
back to our muttons.\
 \
 We’ve defined that the super block and bit maps of blocks/index nodes
occupy the first three blocks of the file system. But how much does the
table of index nodes occupy? Generally speaking, it’s not right to affix
this dimension as it depends on the way we’re going to use the file
system. For instance, you should make this table smaller if you’re going
to store big files mostly. You’re unlikely to run out of index nodes
earlier than of the disk space. On the other hand, if you’re going to
store a lot of small files you’re likely to run out of index nodes
earlier than of the disk space, provided that the table is too small. \
 \
 There is a key *-i* in **mke2fs** utility we use for formatting the
disk for **ext2/3** file systems. The key indicates how much disk space
we need to create an index node. So indicating *-i 16384* we’ll of
create one index node at every 16 kB of the disk space without an
ability to change this value (at least for now). \
 \
 The last thing I’d like to tell you about is the size of the block. A
file system can operate with blocks of different size. I’ll support
blocks of 512, 1024, 2048 and 4096 bite, as it’s better to work with one
page blocks (we’ll get back to it later). But it’s not necessary to do
so. Moreover, big size blocks can assist higher performance.\
 \
 Choosing the appropriate block size in a classical file systems is
quite an interesting subject. For instance, a [popular book about
Operating
Systems](http://www.amazon.com/Modern-Operating-Systems-3rd-Edition/dp/0136006639)
says that a block of 4 kB 60-70% of files will fit into one block. If
you fit more files into one block, the fragmentation will be less, the
read rate higher. But you’ll also use a lot of space to no purpose. In
our case, the block size is also the main limiter of the file system.
When the block size is 4 KB the bit map of free blocks can cover 125 MB
of the disk space only \
 \

### Getting Back to Practice

Now it’s time to write some code. We’ll begin with structures we’re
going to use. \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
struct aufs_disk_super_block
{
    __be32  dsb_magic;
    __be32  dsb_block_size;
    __be32  dsb_root_inode;
    __be32  dsb_inode_blocks;
};
~~~~

\
 We store the super block structure at the very beginning block 0 of the
disk. It begins with the magic number. It helps us to make sure that
**aufs** is stored on disk (I’ve mentioned it previously).\
 \
 Considering the fact that we’ll support different block sizes (which
won’t require any efforts from our side) we should know the size we’re
using in this file system. The super block stores this information in
the **dsb\_block\_size** field.\
 \
 Besides, the **dsb\_inode\_blocks** also stores a great number of
blocks in the table of index nodes. I’ve already mentioned the size of
this table can vary. \
 \
 **dsb\_root\_inode** field also stores the number of the root directory
index node. Of course, it isn’t necessary to store it. You can just use
a fixed number for the root, but then the structure will be empty in
this case, so it seems stronger with it.\
 \
 ![Big endian](/mod_pagespeed_static/1.JiBnMqyl6S.gif "Big endian")\
 You should note that we use types of fixed size for fields, as we’ll
write this structure on a disk “as it is”. But it’s not enough to fix
the size. You should also affix the bite order. We’ll use [big
endian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endianness). It’s the network bite
order. We can understand it by the type name (\_\_be32).\
 \
 The order you’re going to use isn’t that important, but you should
necessarily affix it. But some developers think that there are more
platforms using little endian. Therefore, it’s better to use it. Anyway,
let’s get back to the point.\
 \
 The **\_\_be32** type is actually a synonym of **uint32\_t**. But its
name emphasizes that the variable stores data in big endian (such way of
documenting). There’s a similar type in the kernel for little endian as
well.\
 \
 Now, let’s take a look at the most important structure of the file
system. It’s the index node: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
struct aufs_disk_inode
{
    __be32  di_first;
    __be32  di_blocks;
    __be32  di_size;
    __be32  di_gid;
    __be32  di_uid;
    __be32  di_mode;
    __be64  di_ctime;
};
~~~~

\
 First of all, the index node determines the place the file/catalog is
stored on disk. There can be various ways of storing files. We’ll use a
simple one: one extent for one file. Extent is the continuous sequence
of disk blocks. We’ll store each file/catalog in the continuous sequence
of blocks. **di\_first** and **di\_blocks** fields store the first block
and the number of blocks in the extent accordingly.\
 \
 You might wonder how we can write data to the end of the file and add
the writing to the catalog. When storing in such a way the complete
implementation of operations leading to the change of the file/catalog
is indeed a pain in the neck (let alone the efficiency of such
implementation). Therefore, we’re not going to perform the full writing
implementation. Maybe I’ll tell you about it in the following article. \
 \
 Such organization has positive aspects. Files are not fragmented, which
has a good affect on the speed of successive reading. Therefore, we can
use such structure in file systems meant for reading only. For example,
in [iso 9660](http://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_9660) (though it already
supports files fragmentation).\
 \
 It’s clear that extents aren’t a complex structure that doesn’t provide
a lot of things. But together with classic tree-like structure for file
storage they are quite a good variant for file systems supporting
fragmentation.\
 \
 In addition to specifying the place on a disk, the index node also
stores an actual size of the file in **di\_size** field. Actually, the
file size shouldn’t fit the size of one block.\
 \
 **di\_gid** and **di\_uid** are identifiers of the group and the user.
It’s not always reasonable to store such information in the file system.
I put in them as an example.\
 \
 **di\_mode** field stores access rights for the group of the file owner
and all other users. \
 Since we’ve stored the group and the owner, we should store the access
rights as well. **di\_mode** also stores the object type describing the
index node. For example, it indicates, whether the object is a catalog
or a file.\
 \
 Finally, **di\_ctime** field stores the date of the file creation. File
systems usually store the dates of the latest update and access to the
file as well, but we won’t care about them. \
 \

### Formatting the Disk

Thus, we’ve determined the file system format on the disk and now it’s
time to write an utility casting the disk to the necessary format. Disks
in Linux are just a file (that’s where we should mention [a popular Unix
feature](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everything_is_a_file)). So disk
formatting is just writing necessary data to the file. In our case it’s
the super block, bit maps and the root catalog (empty for now).\
 \
 Not to make the article about Linux kernel become an article about C++
(especially considering [Linus attitude towards the
latter](http://www.drdobbs.com/cpp/linus-and-c/229700143)), I recommend
you to get familiar with the source code at github. Anyway, we’re going
to review the basic classes:\
 \

-   **Configuration** is the class storing the file system configuration
    (the block size, the size of the index nodes table, the number of
    blocks, the name of the device file).
-   **Block** represents one block of the disk. We read and write data
    from the disk in blocks.
-   **BlocksCache** — provides the access to the blocks.
-   **Inode** — is the wrapper for the index node. It hides the
    conversion of bite order, as well as writing and reading of the
    index node from the block.
-   **SuperBlock** is the wrapper for the super block. As well as in
    case with **Inode** it hides the writing and reading from the block.
    It also fills the bit maps, allocates index nodes and blocks. Thus,
    it actually performs formatting.

\
 The utility allows changing the block size using *-s* or
*--block\_size* keys, as well as the number of blocks we’re going to use
for the file system utilizing *-b* or *–blocks* keys. \
 On the whole, the utility is simple, but some of you may think that the
code is too complex for such an easy task. The thing is that we’ll
firstly teach the file system read form the disk and then get down to
writing. In order to control the operation of our driver we should write
something to the disk. We’ll later add to our utility an ability of
importing the files/catalogs when formatting the disk. This will help us
a lot. \
 \

### Getting Back to the File System

Now let’s get back to our loadable module. We’ll start with reading the
super block from the disk. But before that, we’re going to build another
structure for the super block: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
struct aufs_super_block
{
    uint32_t    asb_magic;
    uint32_t    asb_inode_blocks;
    uint32_t    asb_block_size;
    uint32_t    asb_root_inode;
    uint32_t    asb_inodes_in_block;
};
~~~~

\
 This structure will represent the super block in the memory. The idea
is simple – we read from **aufs\_disk\_super\_block** disk and convert
it to **aufs\_super\_block** executing the conversion of the bite order
and also calculating various useful data (**asb\_inodes\_in\_block** in
the given case). This structure is actually a great place for global
variables of the file system. \
 \
 Getting back the previous post, there are three structures to represent
the super block: \

-   **super\_block** is the structure provided by the kernel;
-   **aufs\_disk\_super\_block** is the structure we store on the disk;
-   **aufs\_super\_block** is another structure we’ll store in the
    memory;

Two structures are okay, but what is the third one for? The thing is
that Linux doesn’t know anything about our file system. So it’s quite
possible that the super block (as well as inode and any other structure
of Linux kernel) doesn’t have all the necessary fields. Therefore, we
should build additional structures and attach them to the kernel
structures. But how should we do that? \
 \
 There are two popular ways of implementing such connection in the
kernel (let’s name them composition and generalization). We’ll utilize
the composition for the super block. This approach requires support from
the kernel. There’s an interesting filed inside [the super\_block
structure](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/fs.h?v=3.14#L1246):\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
struct super_block {
    ...
    void    *s_fs_info;
    ...
};
~~~~

\
 We can store a pointer to any data in this field. That’s exactly where
we’re going to store the pointer for the **aufs\_super\_block**.
Everywhere we have the access to the super block structure we can get
the access to the **aufs\_super\_block** structure as well. Anyway, our
task is to read the super block from the disk. We’ll write several
functions for that purpose:\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static struct aufs_super_block *aufs_super_block_read(struct super_block *sb)
{
    struct aufs_super_block *asb = (struct aufs_super_block *)kzalloc(sizeof(struct aufs_super_block), GFP_NOFS);
    struct aufs_disk_super_block *dsb = NULL;
    struct buffer_head *bh = NULL;

    if (!asb)
    {
        pr_err("aufs cannot allocate super block\n");
        return NULL;
    }

    bh = sb_bread(sb, 0);
    if (!bh)
    {
        pr_err("cannot read 0 block\n");
        goto free_memory;
    }

    dsb = (struct aufs_disk_super_block *)bh->b_data;
    aufs_super_block_fill(asb, dsb);
    brelse(bh);

    if (asb->asb_magic != AUFS_MAGIC)
    {
        pr_err("wrong magic number %u\n", (unsigned)asb->asb_magic);
        goto free_memory;
    }

    return asb;

free_memory:
    kfree(asb);
    return NULL;
}
~~~~

\
 The first thing this function does is allocating memory for the super
block structure. There are quite many ways to allocate the memory in the
kernel.
[kzalloc](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/slab.h?v=3.14#L638)
(and
[kmalloc](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/slab.h?v=3.14#L441)
as well) is the simplest one. It operates the same way as general
*malloc*, but it requires passing the additional set of flags. In
contrast to *kmalloc*, *kzalloc* fills the allocated memory with zeros
(which just comes to passing an additional flag inside *kmalloc*).\
 \
 We’ve mentioned flags. What are they for? The point is that different
kernel parts should meet requirements of different guarantees. For
instance, we shouldn’t lock up when processing the network packet. In
order to involve
[DMA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_memory_access) we should
allocate the memory in the special memory area. Since we use the memory
allocation everywhere, we need a mechanism of “adjustment”. We’ll
utilize **GFP\_NOFS** flag. It notifies that the memory allocator won’t
refer to the file system facilities. It’s quite logical when
implementing the file system, though it isn’t necessary in this very
case. \
 \
 We shouldn’t forget to control that we’ve allocated the memory. \
 \
 The next principal moment is calling
[sb\_bread](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/buffer_head.h?v=3.14#L297)
function. Here’s reading from the disk itself! The function accepts the
pointer to the super block and the block number we should read. That’s
simple. The function returns the pointer to
[buffer\_head](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/buffer_head.h?v=3.14#L62)
structure, while the block data are available using **b\_data** of the
structure. \
 \
 Of course, we shouldn't forget to check that the reading took place
without fail. \
 \
 Then we just convert the pointer into **char** to
**aufs\_disk\_super\_block** structure pointer.
**aufs\_super\_block\_fill** function fills **aufs\_super\_block**
structure by using **aufs\_disk\_super\_block**: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static inline void aufs_super_block_fill(struct aufs_super_block *asb,
            struct aufs_disk_super_block const *dsb)
{
    asb->asb_magic = be32_to_cpu(dsb->dsb_magic);
    asb->asb_inode_blocks = be32_to_cpu(dsb->dsb_inode_blocks);
    asb->asb_block_size = be32_to_cpu(dsb->dsb_block_size);
    asb->asb_root_inode = be32_to_cpu(dsb->dsb_root_inode);
    asb->asb_inodes_in_block =
        asb->asb_block_size / sizeof(struct aufs_disk_inode);
}
~~~~

\
 As you might have guessed, **be32\_to\_cpu** function converts the
number from big endian into the bite order used by the platform.\
 \
 We should allocate the block after finishing our work with it. There’s
[brelse](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/buffer_head.h?v=3.14#L285)
function for this purpose. It reduces the counter of references to this
block. The block won’t be deallocated right after the counter reaches 0.
The garbage collector operates for blocks in the kernel. It won’t free
the block unless necessary. The thing is that reading blocks from the
disk is quite a long operation. Therefore, it’s reasonable to support
the cache of the read blocks and return the one already read when the
block is reread (of course, if it’s not in the cache yet). \
 \
 The last thing we’ll do is check the magic number as we should make
sure that **aufs** is stored on disk. \
 \
 For those having paid their attention to *goto*, it’s used in the
kernel quite often. Mostly to organize the error processing. There are
no exceptions in C language. But the idea of dividing the main way of
executing and processing errors is quite attractive. That’s when *goto*
comes to help us. In our case *goto* use doesn’t give anything. I used
it knowingly, as an example of what it can be used for. There’re not
many *goto* haters among kernel developers. Therefore, there are some
areas in the code misusing the [ill-fated
operator](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD02xx/EWD215.html).
You should be ready for that. \
 \
 A cautious reader may have paid attention to a mismatch. As I’ve
already mentioned, file systems can work with blocks of different size.
This information is most likely to be stored in the super block. So the
block of what size will **sb\_bread** function read when reading the
super block? It’s simple in our case. By default, the block size is
determined as a size of the block device (so many blocks…). We’re hoping
that its size is enough for the super block structure. It is in our
case. \
 \
 We’ve written the function to read the super block. We’re going to call
it from **aufs\_fill\_super** (refer to [the previous
post](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel)).
Now it looks like the following: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static int aufs_fill_sb(struct super_block *sb, void *data, int silent)
{
    struct inode *root = NULL;
    struct aufs_super_block *asb = aufs_super_block_read(sb);

    if (!asb)
        return -EINVAL;

    sb->s_magic = asb->asb_magic;
    sb->s_fs_info = asb;
    sb->s_op = &aufs_super_ops;

    if (sb_set_blocksize(sb, asb->asb_block_size) == 0)
    {
        pr_err("device does not support block size %u\n",
                    (unsigned)asb->asb_block_size);
        return -EINVAL;
    }

    root = aufs_inode_get(sb, asb->asb_root_inode);
    if (IS_ERR(root))
        return PTR_ERR(root);

    sb->s_root = d_make_root(root);
    if (!sb->s_root)
    {
        pr_err("aufs cannot create root\n");
        return -ENOMEM;
    }

    return 0;
}
~~~~

\
 As I’ve already mentioned, we store the pointer for the
**aufs\_super\_block** in the **s\_fs\_info** field. We also set the
proper block size by calling
[sb\_set\_blocksize](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/block_dev.c?i=3.14#L134).
As says the comment inside the function the block size should be from
512 bytes till one page size. That’s how we chose the block size. We’re
going to need additional efforts (well, not that big) if the file system
has to work with a block of the big size.\
 \
 Anyway, we’ve allocated **aufs\_super\_block** in the dynamic memory.
Thus, we should take care of deallocating it. Let's apply some changes
to another function from [the previous
post](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel):
\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static void aufs_put_super(struct super_block *sb)
{
    struct aufs_super_block *asb = (struct aufs_super_block *)sb->s_fs_info;
    if (asb)
        kfree(asb);
    sb->s_fs_info = NULL;
    pr_debug("aufs super block destroyed\n");
}
~~~~

\
 As you might have guessed,
[kfree](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/mm/slab.c?v=3.14#L3650) is
the pair function to **kmalloc** (there are several kfree
implementations in the kernel —
[here](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/mm/slub.c?v=3.14#L3380) and
[here](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/mm/slob.c?v=3.14#L486)), but
let’s not go into details. \
 \
 Another significant change inside **aufs\_fill\_sb** function is
calling **aufs\_inode\_get**. In the previous article we created a dummy
*inode*. Now we’ll learn how to read them from the disk. \
 \
 But before that I’m going to draw your attention to
[IS\_ERR](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/err.h?v=3.14#L32)
and
[PTR\_ERR](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/err.h?v=3.14#L27).
These simple conversions from pointers into the number and backwards are
based on the fact that the kernel possesses the full information about
its memory. So it knows which bits we can use as intended. It’s the
simplest example of using the knowledge about the pointer structure.
There are also more interesting ones, not only in the kernel. For
instance, take a look at [Facebook
Folly](https://github.com/facebook/folly/blob/master/folly/PackedSyncPtr.h).\
 \
 We’ll start our work with index nodes from extending the
[super\_operations](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/fs.h?v=3.14#L1602)
structure we got familiar with previously. Let’s fill it the following
way:\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static struct super_operations const aufs_super_ops = {
    .alloc_inode = aufs_inode_alloc,
    .destroy_inode = aufs_inode_free,
    .put_super = aufs_put_super,
};
~~~~

\
 We’ve added a pair of pointers for the **aufs\_inode\_alloc** and the
**aufs\_inode\_free** functions. They are specific functions to allocate
and deallocate the *inode*. That’s when we meet **SLAB** (we’ve actually
met it in the form of **kmalloc**) and **RCU** (just a little bit).\
 \
 Thus, we’ll start deallocating the memory for the index node from
defining another structure – representing the index node in the memory
(the way it was with the super block): \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
struct aufs_inode
{
    struct inode    ai_inode;
    uint32_t    ai_block;
};
~~~~

\
 This time we’re going to use inheritance instead of composition.
Inheritance in C is not difficult (which is no surprise, since C doesn’t
support it). The first field of **aufs\_inode** structure is the basic
structure (basic class) —
[inode](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/fs.h?v=3.14#L527)
structure. So we can use the pointer to **aufs\_inode** as a pointer to
*inode*, and vice versa (of course, if we know for sure that the given
pointer refers exactly to **aufs\_inode**).\
 \
 In contrast to composition, «inheritance» doesn’t require support from
the kernel side. Besides, it’s more advantageous from the point of view
of the number of memory allocations. Instead of two, just one allocation
is required for each index node (the way it was with the super block).
As against the super block, *inode* contains all the necessary fields.
Since our file system stores data on the disk easily, it’s rather an
exception than a rule.\
 \
 In order to allocate the memory for index nodes we’re going to utilize
[SLAB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slab_allocation) allocator. SLAB
allocator is the caching allocator. It allows allocating memory blocks
of the same size. You might have guessed that thanks to this restriction
we can simplify memory control and speed up memory allocation. SLAB
allocator acquires big memory chunks from the operational system. It
allocates small areas from them on the request. Therefore, requests to
the manager of OS memory take place less frequently. While users
requests are satisfied faster. \
 \
 Initially, the gain in the speed of memory allocation when using SLABs
wasn’t just due to simpler memory control. It was also reached thanks to
reducing the cost of the memory initialization. Really, we often use
SLAB allocator not to simply allocate objects of the same size. We use
it to allocate the objects of the same type. This allows us to skip
initialization of some fields when allocating again the same memory
area. For instance, mutex, spin locks and other similar objects are most
likely to have the “proper” value when deallocating the block.
Therefore, they don’t need the repeated initialization when reallocated.
Please refer to the [original
article](https://www.usenix.org/legacy/publications/library/proceedings/bos94/full_papers/bonwick.a)
in order to learn the details and results. \
 \
 For the moment there are three different types of allocators in Linux —
SLAB, [SLUB](http://lwn.net/Articles/229984/) and
[SLOB](http://lwn.net/Articles/157944/). Let’s not get into details of
their differences since they provide the same interface. Anyway, we’re
going to use the following function in order to create a SLAB allocator:
\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
int aufs_inode_cache_create(void)
{
    aufs_inode_cache = kmem_cache_create("aufs_inode",
                sizeof(struct aufs_inode),
                0, (SLAB_RECLAIM_ACCOUNT|SLAB_MEM_SPREAD),
                aufs_inode_init_once);

    if (aufs_inode_cache == NULL)
        return -ENOMEM;

    return 0;
}
~~~~

\
 When creating a SLAB, we pass function the name, the object size, the
function of initialization (the function which will be called once only,
when the object is allocated for the first time) and few more parameters
to
[kmem\_cache\_create](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/mm/slab_common.c?v=3.14#L267).
For those interested I can say that creating SLABs for index nodes looks
the same in all file systems and their differences are inessential. \
 \
 We’re going to call **aufs\_inode\_cache\_create** function when
loading the module, before we register the file system in the kernel.
There’s also a pair function we’ll call when unloading the module: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
void aufs_inode_cache_destroy(void)
{
    rcu_barrier();
    kmem_cache_destroy(aufs_inode_cache);
    aufs_inode_cache = NULL;
}
~~~~

\
 **kmem\_cache\_destroy** function destroys the SLAB allocator. You
should deallocate all objects from this cache by the moment of
destruction. Otherwise we’ll get an error message in the system log
together with a lot of other troubles. \
 \
 Now, let’s get down to the promised
[RCU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read-copy-update) contact. In short,
RCU is a popular synchronization (and also safe memory reclamation for
lock-free algorithms) mechanism in the kernel. RCU maintainer in Linux
kernel wrote a
[book](https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/people/paulmck/perfbook/perfbook.html),
in which he touched upon his brainchild as well. \
 \
 Among all RCU functions, we should deal only with
[rcu\_barrier](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/kernel/rcu/tree_plugin.h?v=3.14#L939)
(as well as with **kfree**, [here is another
implementation](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/rcutiny.h?v=3.14#L45)
of this function). To cut a long story short, this function will wait
till all time-delayed operations on the protected RCU data finish. Then
it will return the control to the one having called it. So this function
is the blocking one. We’ll see below, what it’s used for.\
 \
 But let’s get back to memory allocation and consider the mentioned
above function: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
struct inode *aufs_inode_alloc(struct super_block *sb)
{
    struct aufs_inode *const i = (struct aufs_inode *)
                kmem_cache_alloc(aufs_inode_cache, GFP_KERNEL);

    if (!i)
        return NULL;

    return &i->ai_inode;
}
~~~~

\
 It uses the created earlier SLAB allocator (with the help of one of
[kmem\_cache\_alloc](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/ident?i=kmem_cache_alloc;v=3.14)
implementations) and returns the pointer to *inode*. Nothing irregular.
But function of memory reclamation is a lot more interesting:\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
void aufs_inode_free(struct inode *inode)
{
    call_rcu(&inode->i_rcu, aufs_free_callback);
}
~~~~

\
 That’ when we face RCU again. We should say a few words about
[lock-free](http://kukuruku.co/tag/lock-free) algorithms. The problem of
such algorithms is that without locks there are no guarantees that the
object isn’t being used in-parallel by some other thread of execution.
Therefore, we can’t deallocate the memory occupied by this object as
another thread can store a pointer to it. That’s why we should think of
strategies of safe memory reclamation in lock-free algorithms.
Meanwhile, RCU provides facilities to solve this problem. All
implementations of **call\_rcu** function delay the execution of some
function (in our case **aufs\_free\_callback** reclamation function)
till the moment it’s safe to do it. The mentioned above **rcu\_barrier**
waits for completion of all delayed functions.\
 \
 Tired? It’s okay, we’re almost finished. Now we’ll read the index node
from the disk. I wrote the mentioned **aufs\_inode\_get** function for
that purpose: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
struct inode *aufs_inode_get(struct super_block *sb, uint32_t no)
{
    struct aufs_super_block const *const asb = AUFS_SB(sb);
    struct buffer_head *bh = NULL;
    struct aufs_disk_inode *di = NULL;
    struct aufs_inode *ai = NULL;
    struct inode *inode = NULL;
    uint32_t block = 0, offset = 0;

    inode = iget_locked(sb, no);
    if (!inode)
        return ERR_PTR(-ENOMEM);

    if (!(inode->i_state & I_NEW))
        return inode;

    ai = AUFS_INODE(inode);
    block = aufs_inode_block(asb, no);
    offset = aufs_inode_offset(asb, no);

    pr_debug("aufs reads inode %u from %u block with offset %u\n",
                (unsigned)no, (unsigned)block,
                (unsigned)offset);

    bh = sb_bread(sb, block);
    if (!bh)
    {
        pr_err("cannot read block %u\n", (unsigned)block);
        goto read_error;
    }

    di = (struct aufs_disk_inode *)(bh->b_data + offset);
    aufs_inode_fill(ai, di);
    brelse(bh);

    unlock_new_inode(inode);

    return inode;

read_error:
    pr_err("aufs cannot read inode %u\n", (unsigned)no);
    iget_failed(inode);

    return ERR_PTR(-EIO);
}
~~~~

\
 I should begin my explanations from the simple things. The **AUFS\_SB**
and **AUFS\_INODE** functions allow us to get a pointer for the
**aufs\_super\_block** and the **aufs\_inode**, via pointers to
**super\_block** and *inode* accordingly. Since I’ve already described
the way they’re connected, I’m not going to provide their code (it’s
quite simple).\
 \
 **aufs\_inode\_block** and **aufs\_inode\_offset** functions allow us
get the block number and the shift inside the block by the index node
number. It’s no magic, just a simple arithmetic.\
 \
 Now let’s take a look at
[iget\_locked](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/inode.c?v=3.14#L1073)
and
[unlock\_new\_inode](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/inode.c?v=3.14#L933)
functions. As well as in case with blocks the kernel supports the cache
of *inodes*. We need it not only to avoid reading the index node from
the disk once more. The point is that the same file/catalog can be used
by several processes at the same time. In this case all of them should
operate on one *inode* exemplar, so that we could synchronize them. We
can apply it to blocks as well. \
 \
 Thus, **idet\_locked** function first of all looks for an *inode* in
the cache and allocates memory for the new one if the *inode* isn’t
found. If we’ve allocated the index node once more but haven’t found it
in the cache, we’ll set *I\_NEW* flag in **i\_state** field. We’ll also
hold the spin lock of this node (**i\_lock** field). That’s why our
function firstly checks the **i\_state** field. If *I\_NEW* flag is
dropped then we simply return the cached *inode*. Otherwise we should
fill *inode*, by reading the necessary block from the disk (by using
**sb\_bread**).\
 \
 **aufs\_inode\_fill** function is responsible for filling:\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static void aufs_inode_fill(struct aufs_inode *ai,
            struct aufs_disk_inode const *di)
{
    ai->ai_block = be32_to_cpu(di->di_first);
    ai->ai_inode.i_mode = be32_to_cpu(di->di_mode);
    ai->ai_inode.i_size = be32_to_cpu(di->di_size);
    ai->ai_inode.i_blocks = be32_to_cpu(di->di_blocks);
    ai->ai_inode.i_ctime.tv_sec = be64_to_cpu(di->di_ctime);
    ai->ai_inode.i_mtime.tv_sec = ai->ai_inode.i_atime.tv_sec =
                ai->ai_inode.i_ctime.tv_sec;
    ai->ai_inode.i_mtime.tv_nsec = ai->ai_inode.i_atime.tv_nsec =
                ai->ai_inode.i_ctime.tv_nsec = 0;
    i_uid_write(&ai->ai_inode, (uid_t)be32_to_cpu(di->di_uid));
    i_gid_write(&ai->ai_inode, (gid_t)be32_to_cpu(di->di_gid));
}
~~~~

\

[i\_uid\_write](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/fs.h?v=3.14#L719)
and
[i\_gid\_write](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/fs.h?v=3.14#L724)
functions assign values to the appropriate fields.\
 \
 I’d also like to draw your attention to the time representation in the
form of
[timespec](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/uapi/linux/time.h?v=3.14#L9)
structure. It consists of two numbers – the number of seconds and
nanoseconds. So we can potentially store the time for a long time.\
 \
 In the end, we should deallocate the spin lock and return the pointer.
We’ll use **unlock\_new\_inode** function for that purpose. \
 \

Instead of the Summary
----------------------

The post is really big and even so it doesn’t cover everything. I just
tried to explain the key parts of implementation.\
 \
 You can find all the source code
[here](https://github.com/krinkinmu/aufs). There are two folders in the
repository now — kern and user. One of them stores the code of our
module. The second one stores the code of the utility used for
formatting. The code is longer. Therefore, the probability of errors in
it is higher. You’re most welcome to write your comments and useful
criticism, as well as pull requests. \
 \
 In order to get the disk image for arrangement, you can do the
following: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
dd bs=1M count=100 if=/dev/zero of=image
./mkfs.aufs ./image
~~~~

\
 Now you can use image file the way it’s used in [the previous
post](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel).
\
 \
 I’ve omitted some debugger output from the code. But if you’re going to
use the code from the repository, you’ll be able to make sure that the
module operates utilizing **dmesg** command.

-   [](#)
    1
-   [](#)
-   8030
-   [**](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/teaching-the-file-system-to-read)
-   [**](http://twitter.com/share?url=http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/teaching-the-file-system-to-read&text=Teaching%20the%20File%20System%20to%20Read%20@KukurukuCo)
-   [**](http://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?s=100&p[url]=http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/teaching-the-file-system-to-read)

###### Published by

[![Kukuruku
Hub](/mod_pagespeed_static/1.JiBnMqyl6S.gif)](http://kukuruku.co/profile/kukuruku/)

#### [Kukuruku Hub](http://kukuruku.co/profile/kukuruku/)

We work in the dark. We do what we can. We give what we have. Our doubt
is our passion, and our passion is our task. The rest is the madness of
art.

[Follow](#)

###### Published in

#### [\*nix](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/ "*nix")

The \*nix world is all about Unix-like systems, e.g., Linux, BSD, etc

### 0 comments

Only registered users can comment.

### Read Next

-   [](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/processes-paralleling-to-speed-up-computing-and-tasks-execution-in-linux)
    Processes Paralleling to Speed up Computing and Tasks Execution in
    Linux
    14415
    [\*nix](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/)
-   [](http://kukuruku.co/hub/opensource/multitasking-management-in-the-operating-system-kernel)
    Multitasking Management in the Operating System Kernel
    11155
    [Open Source](http://kukuruku.co/hub/opensource/)
-   [](http://kukuruku.co/hub/cpp/lock-free-data-structures-basics-atomicity-and-atomic-primitives)
    Lock-free Data Structures. Basics: Atomicity and Atomic Primitives
    18804
    [C++](http://kukuruku.co/hub/cpp/)

-   [About](/page/about)
-   [Rules](/page/rules)
-   [Privacy Policy](/page/privacy)
-   [Contact
    us](http://www.cloudflare.com/email-protection#cfbcbabfbfa0bdbb8fa4baa4babdbaa4bae1aca0)
-   ·
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/kukurukuco)
-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/kukurukuco)

[](# "Up")

×

#### Authorization

﻿

-   [**Sign in with
    Github](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/github/ "Sign in with Github")
-   [**Sign in with
    Twitter](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/twitter/?authorize=1 "Sign in with Twitter")
-   [**Sign in with Facebook](# "Sign in with Facebook")

﻿

-   [**Sign in with
    Github](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/github/ "Sign in with Github")
-   [**Sign in with
    Twitter](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/twitter/?authorize=1 "Sign in with Twitter")
-   [**Sign in with Facebook](# "Sign in with Facebook")

login

e-mail

password

re-enter password

let's make sure you are not a robot

Sign up

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/teaching-the-file-system-to-read
