-   [Airbnb Nerds](http://nerds.airbnb.com)
-   [Code](http://nerds.airbnb.com/code/)
-   [Data](http://nerds.airbnb.com/data/)
-   [News](http://nerds.airbnb.com/news/)
-   [Tech Talks](http://nerds.airbnb.com/tech-talks/)
-   [Open Source](http://nerds.airbnb.com/open-source/)

[Toogle menu](javascript:void(null))

[Airbnb Engineering](http://nerds.airbnb.com/ "Airbnb Engineering")Nerds

-   [Code](http://nerds.airbnb.com/code/)
-   [Tech Talks](http://nerds.airbnb.com/tech-talks/)
-   [Open Source](http://nerds.airbnb.com/open-source/)
-   [News](http://nerds.airbnb.com/news/)
-   [Data](http://nerds.airbnb.com/data/)

-   [Code](http://nerds.airbnb.com/code/)
-   [Tech Talks](http://nerds.airbnb.com/tech-talks/)
-   [Open Source](http://nerds.airbnb.com/open-source/)
-   [News](http://nerds.airbnb.com/news/)
-   [Data](http://nerds.airbnb.com/data/)

-   ![image](http://nerds.airbnb.com/wp-content/files_mf/1384225374isomorphicjs.png)
    Code [Isomorphic JavaScript: The Future of Web
    Apps](http://nerds.airbnb.com/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/)

Isomorphic JavaScript: The Future of Web Apps
=============================================

![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/506c3ef38d591b77dd7f44e17b68ce23?s=65&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D65&r=G)
**About Spike Brehm**\

\
By [Spike
Brehm](http://nerds.airbnb.com/author/spike-brehm/ "Spike Brehm") \
November 11, 2013 \
[19
Comments](http://nerds.airbnb.com/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/#comments)

\
By [Spike
Brehm](http://nerds.airbnb.com/author/spike-brehm/ "Spike Brehm") \
November 11, 2013 \
[19
Comments](http://nerds.airbnb.com/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/#comments)

> This post has been
> [cross-posted](http://venturebeat.com/2013/11/08/the-future-of-web-apps-is-ready-isomorphic-javascript/)
> on VentureBeat.

At Airbnb, we’ve learned a lot over the past few years while building
rich web experiences. We dove into the single-page app world in 2011
with our [mobile web site](https://m.airbnb.com/), and have since
launched [Wish Lists](https://www.airbnb.com/wishlists) and our
newly-redesigned [search page](https://www.airbnb.com/s), among others.
Each of these is a large JavaScript app, meaning that the bulk of the
code runs in the browser in order to support a more modern, interactive
experience.

This approach is commonplace today, and libraries like Backbone.js,
Ember.js, and Angular.js have made it easier for developers to build
these rich JavaScript apps. We have found, however, that these types of
apps have some critical limitations. To explain why, let’s first take a
quick detour through the history of web apps.

JavaScript Grows Up
-------------------

Since the dawn of the Web, the browsing experience has worked like this:
a web browser would request a particular page (say,
“http://www.geocities.com/”), causing a server somewhere on the Internet
to generate an HTML page and send it back over the wire. This has worked
well because browsers weren’t very powerful and HTML pages represented
documents that were mostly static and self-contained. JavaScript,
created to allow web pages to be more dynamic, didn’t enable much more
than image slideshows and date picker widgets.

After years of advances in personal computing, creative technologists
have pushed the web to its limits, and web browsers have evolved to keep
up. Now, the Web has matured into a fully-featured application platform,
and fast JavaScript runtimes and HTML5 standards have enabled developers
to create the rich apps that before were only possible on native
platforms.

The Single-Page App
-------------------

It wasn’t long before developers started to build out entire
applications in the browser using JavaScript, taking advantage of these
new capabilities. Apps like Gmail, the classic example of the
single-page app, could respond immediately to user interactions, no
longer needing to make a round-trip to the server just to render a new
page.

Libraries like Backbone.js, Ember.js, and Angular.js are often referred
to as client-side MVC (Model-View-Controller) or MVVM
(Model-View-ViewModel) libraries. The typical client-side MVC
architecture looks something like this:

[![Screen Shot 2013-11-06 at 5.21.00
PM](http://nerds.airbnb.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/isomorphic-client-side-mvc.png)](http://nerds.airbnb.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/Screen-Shot-2013-11-06-at-5.21.00-PM.png)

The bulk of the application logic (views, templates, controllers,
models, internationalization, etc.) lives in the client, and it talks to
an API for data. The server could be written in any language, such as
Ruby, Python, or Java, and it mostly handles serving up an initial
barebones page of HTML. Once the JavaScript files are downloaded by the
browser, they are evaluated and the client-side app is initialized,
fetching data from the API and rendering the rest of the HTML page.

This is great for the user because once the app is initially loaded, it
can support quick navigation between pages without refreshing the page,
and if done right, can even work offline.

This is great for the developer because the idealized single-page app
has a clear separation of concerns between the client and the server,
promoting a nice development workflow and preventing the need to share
too much logic between the two, which are often written in different
languages.

Trouble in Paradise
-------------------

In practice, however, there are a few fatal flaws with this approach
that prevent it from being right for many use cases.

### SEO

An application that can only run in the client-side cannot serve HTML to
crawlers, so it will have poor SEO by default. Web crawlers function by
making a request to a web server and interpreting the result; but if the
server returns a blank page, it’s not of much value. There are
workarounds, but not without jumping through some hoops.

### Performance

By the same token, if the server doesn’t render a full page of HTML but
instead waits for client-side JavaScript to do so, users will experience
a few critical seconds of blank page or loading spinner before seeing
the content on the page. There are plenty of studies showing the drastic
effect a slow site has on users, and thus revenue. [Amazon
claims](http://www.strangeloopnetworks.com/resources/infographics/web-performance-and-ecommerce/amazon-100ms-faster-1-revenue-increase/)
that each 100ms reduction in page load time raises revenue by 1%.
Twitter spent a year and 40 engineers [rebuilding their site to render
on the server instead of the
client](https://blog.twitter.com/2012/improving-performance-twittercom),
claiming a 5x improvement in perceived loading time.

### Maintainability

While the ideal case can lead to a nice, clean separation of concerns,
inevitably some bits of application logic or view logic end up
duplicated between client and server, often in different languages.
Common examples are date and currency formatting, form validations, and
routing logic. This makes maintenance a nightmare, especially for more
complex apps.

Some developers, myself included, feel bitten by this approach — it’s
often only after having invested the time and effort to build a
single-page app that it becomes clear what the drawbacks are.

A Hybrid Approach
-----------------

At the end of the day, we really want a hybrid of the new and old
approaches: we want to serve fully-formed HTML from the server for
performance and SEO, but we want the speed and flexibility of
client-side application logic.

To this end, we’ve been experimenting at Airbnb with “Isomorphic
JavaScript” apps, which are JavaScript applications that can run both on
the client-side and the server-side.

An isomorphic app might look like this, dubbed here “Client-server MVC”:

[![Screen Shot 2013-11-07 at 10.29.32
AM](http://nerds.airbnb.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/isomorphic-client-server-mvc.png)](http://nerds.airbnb.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/Screen-Shot-2013-11-07-at-10.29.32-AM.png)

In this world, some of your application and view logic can be executed
on both the server and the client. This opens up all sorts of doors —
performance optimizations, better maintainability, SEO-by-default, and
more stateful web apps.

With [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/), a fast, stable server-side
JavaScript runtime, we can now make this dream a reality. By creating
the appropriate abstractions, we can write our application logic such
that it runs on both the server and the client — the definition of
isomorphic JavaScript.

Isomorphic JavaScript in the Wild
---------------------------------

This idea isn’t new — Nodejitsu [wrote a great
description](http://blog.nodejitsu.com/scaling-isomorphic-javascript-code)
of isomorphic JavaScript architecture in 2011 — but it’s been slow to
adopt. There have been a few isomorphic frameworks to spring up already.

Mojito was the first open-source isomorphic framework to get any press.
It’s an advanced, full-stack Node.js-based framework, but its dependence
on YUI and Yahoo!-specific quirks haven’t led to much popularity in the
JavaScript community since they [open sourced
it](http://developer.yahoo.com/blogs/ydn/yahoo-mojito-now-open-source-52490.html)
in April 2012.

[Meteor](http://www.meteor.com/) is probably the most well-known
isomorphic project today. Meteor is built from the ground up to support
real-time apps, and the team is building an entire ecosystem around its
package manager and deployment tools. Like Mojito, it is a large,
opinionated Node.js framework, however it’s done a much better job
engaging the JavaScript community, and its much-anticipated 1.0 release
is just around the corner. Meteor is a project to keep tabs on — it’s
got an all-star team, and it’s raised $11.2 M from Andreessen Horowitz —
unheard of for a company wholly focused on releasing an open-source
product.

[Asana](https://asana.com/), the task management app founded by Facebook
cofounder Dustin Moskovitz, has an interesting isomorphic story. Not
hurting for funding, considering Moskovitz’ status as youngest
billionaire in the world, Asana spent years in R&D developing their
closed-source [Luna](https://asana.com/luna) framework, one of the most
advanced examples of isomorphic JavaScript around. Luna, originally
built on [v8cgi](https://code.google.com/p/v8cgi/) in the days before
Node.js existed, allows a complete copy of the app to run on the server
for every single user session. It runs a separate server process for
each user, executing the same JavaScript application code on the server
that is running in the client, enabling a whole class of advanced
optimizations, such as robust offline support and snappy real-time
updates.

We launched an isomorphic library of our own earlier this year. Called
[Rendr](http://nerds.airbnb.com/weve-launched-our-first-nodejs-app-to-product/),
it allows you to build a Backbone.js + Handlebars.js single-page app
that can also be fully rendered on the server-side. Rendr is a product
of our experience rebuilding the [Airbnb mobile
web](https://m.airbnb.com/) app to drastically improve pageload times,
which is especially important for users on high-latency mobile
connections. Rendr strives to be a library rather than a framework, so
it solves fewer of the problems for you compared to Mojito or Meteor,
but it is easy to modify and extend.

Abstraction, Abstraction, Abstraction
-------------------------------------

That these projects tend to be large, full-stack web frameworks speaks
to the difficulty of the problem. The client and server are very
dissimilar environments, and so we must create a set of abstractions
that decouple our application logic from the underlying implementations,
so we can expose a single API to the application developer.

### Routing

We want a single set of routes that map URI patterns to route handlers.
Our route handlers need to be able to access HTTP headers, cookies, and
URI information, and specify redirects without directly accessing
window.location (browser) or req and res (Node.js).

### Fetching and persisting data

We want to describe the resources needed to render a particular page or
component independently from the fetching mechanism. The resource
descriptor could be a simple URI pointing to a JSON endpoint, or for
larger applications, it may be useful to encapsulate resources in models
and collections and specify a model class and primary key, which at some
point would get translated to a URI.

### View rendering

Whether we choose to directly manipulate the DOM, stick with
string-based HTML templating, or opt for a UI component library with a
DOM abstraction, we need to be able to generate markup isomorphically.
We should be able to render any view on either the server or the client,
dependent on the needs of our application.

### Building and packaging

It turns out writing isomorphic application code is only half the
battle. Tools like [Grunt](http://gruntjs.com/) and
[Browserify](http://browserify.org/) are essential parts of the workflow
to actually get the app up and running. There can be a number of build
steps: compiling templates, including client-side dependencies, applying
transforms, minification, etc. The simple case is to combine all
application code, views and templates into a single bundle, but for
larger apps, this can result in hundreds of kilobytes to download. A
more advanced approach is to create dynamic bundles and introduce asset
lazy-loading, however this quickly gets complicated. Static-analysis
tools like [Esprima](http://esprima.org/) can allow ambitious developers
to attempt advanced optimization and
[metaprogramming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaprogramming) to
reduce boilerplate code.

Composing Together Small Modules
--------------------------------

Being first to market with an isomorphic framework means you have to
solve all these problems at once. But this leads to large, unwieldy
frameworks that are hard to adopt and integrate into an already-existing
app. As more developers tackle this problem, we’ll see an explosion of
small, reusable modules that can be integrated together to build
isomorphic apps.

It turns out that most JavaScript modules can already be used
isomorphically with little to no modification. For example, popular
libraries like Underscore, Backbone.js, Handlebars.js, Moment, and even
jQuery can be used on the server.

To demonstrate this point, I’ve created a sample app called
[isomorphic-tutorial](https://github.com/spikebrehm/isomorphic-tutorial)
that you can check out on GitHub. By combining together a few modules,
each that can be used isomorphically, it’s easy to create a simple
isomorphic app in just a few hundred lines of code. It uses
[Director](https://github.com/flatiron/director) for server- and
browser-based routing,
[Superagent](https://github.com/visionmedia/superagent) for HTTP
requests, and [Handlebars.js](https://github.com/wycats/handlebars.js)
for templating, all built on top of a basic
[Express.js](https://github.com/visionmedia/express) app. Of course, as
an app grows in complexity, one has to introduce more layers of
abstraction, but my hope is that as more developers experiment with
this, there will be new libraries and standards to emerge.

The View From Here
------------------

As more organizations get comfortable running Node.js in production,
it’s inevitable that more and more web apps will begin to share code
between their client and server code. It’s important to remember that
isomorphic JavaScript is a spectrum — it can start with just sharing
templates, progress to be an entire application’s view layer, all the
way to the majority of the app’s business logic. Exactly what and how
JavaScript code is shared between environments depends entirely on the
application being built and its unique set of constraints.

Nicholas C. Zakas h[as a nice
description](http://www.nczonline.net/blog/2013/10/07/node-js-and-the-new-web-front-end/)
of how he envisions apps will begin to pull their UI layer down to the
server from the client, enabling performance and maintainability
optimizations. An app doesn’t have to rip out its backend and replace it
with Node.js to use isomorphic JavaScript, essentially throwing out the
baby with the bathwater. Instead, by creating sensible APIs and RESTful
resources, the traditional backend can live alongside the Node.js layer.

At Airbnb, we’ve already begun to retool our client-side build process
to use Node.js-based tools like Grunt and Browserify. Our main Rails app
may never be entirely supplanted by a Node.js app, but by embracing
these tools it gets ever easier to share certain bits of JavaScript and
templates between environments.

You heard it here first — within a few years, it will be rare to see an
advanced web app that isn’t running some JavaScript on the server.

Learn More
----------

If this idea excites you, come check out the Isomorphic JavaScript
workshop I’ll be teaching at
[DevBeat](http://venturebeat.com/events/devbeat2013/) on Tuesday,
November 12 in San Francisco, or at [General
Assembly](https://generalassemb.ly/education/advanced-javascript/san-francisco/3353)
on Thursday, November 21. We’ll hack together on the sample Node.js
[isomorphic-tutorial](https://github.com/spikebrehm/isomorphic-tutorial)
app I’ve created to demonstrate how easy it really is to get started
writing isomorphic apps.

Also keep tabs on the evolution of the Airbnb web apps by following me
at [@spikebrehm](https://twitter.com/spikebrehm) and the Airbnb
Engineering team at [@AirbnbNerds](https://twitter.com/AirbnbNerds).

[Code](http://nerds.airbnb.com/code/ "View all posts in Code")

### 19 comments

![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/506c3ef38d591b77dd7f44e17b68ce23?s=65&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D65&r=G)
**About Spike Brehm**\

### Speak Your Mind [Cancel reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/#respond)

Name \*

Email \*

Website

### Comments

1.  Dustin Hoffman

    7 months ago

    This is awesome, it definitely sets the stage for a future where
    more route/render assets are shared between your client app and your
    server app.

    It’s good to be putting more thought into this, I think as a
    community we’ve (perhaps too eagerly) jumped on the single-page site
    bandwagon as Backbone/Ember/Angular rise up, but then we all feel
    the same burn of SEO & performance. The happy medium is being locked
    in on, and that is fantastic.

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11621#respond)

2.  Chase Adams

    7 months ago

    Great article! It’s a hard line to walk, trying to keep things
    isomorphic.

    What are your thoughts on using something like PhantomJS to create
    snapshots that are served to the robots that are crawling? An
    example of how that works:
    [http://blog.christoffer.me/post/2013-04-20-how-to-make-spa-websites-more-search-friendly/\#.UoF7JpRmtbs](http://blog.christoffer.me/post/2013-04-20-how-to-make-spa-websites-more-search-friendly/#.UoF7JpRmtbs).

    Also, the name and email fields on this page are set to
    display:none. I had to disable the style in the inspector to post.
    Hope that helps!

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11622#respond)

3.  Jason

    7 months ago

    I didn’t think this was a very good post.\
     The Trouble in Paradise leaves much to be desired, including real
    perf data in the Performance section.\
     The Twitter anecdote was just that, an anecdote.\
     Also, commenting on this article is very difficult to do. Your
    required form fields are hidden.

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11648#respond)

4.  Philippe

    7 months ago

    Thanks for the article. I’m a bit surprised to read in the subject
    you consider it’s “the future of web apps”, and later in the Trouble
    section: “This makes maintenance a nightmare, especially for more
    complex apps”. This sound incompatible to me.

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11674#respond)

5.  Agelos Pikoulas

    7 months ago

    **Isomorphic** JavaScript (from the Greek {“isos”: “equal”, “morph”:
    “shape”}) is the actualization of the “write once, run everywhere”
    mantra, in steroids.

    Its a huge opportunity for systems to blur the roles of who is the
    client and the server and what gets rendered where, when and why. It
    leads a path to a true dynamic breed of apps & servers, that know
    what needs to be pre-rendered or what should be lazy loaded /
    evaluated / rendered etc.

    **But flexibility in code modularization and dynamic loading and
    evaluation of modules or module/resources bundles is more crucial
    than ever**. And its the point where Javascript doesn’t have one
    module system, but many. The most prominent being AMD (i.e
    RequireJS) and CommonJS (i.e nodejs). Both AMD and CommonJS are
    incompatible in syntax and semantics, one targeting the browser &
    the other the server, with many ‘hacks’ or boilerplates that allow
    each to run on the other runtime – eg like
    [UMD](https://github.com/umdjs/umd).

    Towards this end I developed [uRequire](http://urequire.org) which
    bridges AMD and CommonJS, mainly as a UMD converter and bundler, but
    later made it into an *in-memory resource converter pipeline* – i.e
    a build system that is aware of dependencies.

    I envision that a builder like uRequire could evolve into a dynamic
    code serving system, bundling and/or evaluating code & resources on
    demand. Cause if you can build hotels, [why not serve
    tourists](http://urequire.org/future-directions#dynamic-code-serving)
    ?

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11702#respond)

6.  Ido Green

    7 months ago

    Thank you!\
     It’s a great article that cover some of the main challenges we have
    today on the web with modern web apps.

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11716#respond)

7.  nide

    7 months ago

    With emscripten
    [https://github.com/rfk/emscripten](https://github.com/rfk/emscripten)
    you can run client side on any platform. To me idea of isomorphic
    python with django seems much more interesting.

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11717#respond)

8.  lolmaus

    7 months ago

    This post is not complete without mentioning
    [DerbyJS](http://derbyjs.com/).

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11722#respond)

9.  vmakhaev

    7 months ago

    Why you said nothing about DerbyJS?

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11726#respond)

10. Davide Callegari

    7 months ago

    I started working on heavy js apps in 2008 and I’m quite sick of
    having to deal with 231 js libraries.\
     At first it was fun and exciting, but now it isn’t anymore.\
     Please give me a good solution (framework) that just works \^\^’

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11735#respond)

    -   Greg

        6 months ago

        Meteor.js ?

        [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=13144#respond)

    -   Dan

        7 days ago

        Have you actually dealt with multiple Javascript libraries?

        [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=40167#respond)

11. Cosmin

    7 months ago

    Great article!

    However, consider the following scenario: I have a code-generator
    sitting on the server, written in Java for example, which produces
    HTML which further uses a JS framework which does things like
    client-side validation, formatting, i18n and even DOM-manipulation.

    Is this “Isomorphic” approach valid for this type of application
    described earlier? I mean, should we consider re-factoring our code
    in order to benefit from this type of approach?

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11737#respond)

12. Nathan Tate

    7 months ago

    I’ve been working on an isomorphic nodejs framework built on express
    that automatically generates a front-end sdk of your back-end code.
    I could really use some feedback:
    [https://github.com/RedRabbitDevelopment/ez-ctrl](https://github.com/RedRabbitDevelopment/ez-ctrl)

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=11738#respond)

13. Georgi

    6 months ago

    Wanted to share few thoughts with you because I’ve been user of
    AirBnb since years, and apart from that, have learned a lot of your
    source code.

    Right now I’m rewriting the entire administration panel of a hosting
    company and having the same issues and the main solution was the
    hybrid approach.\
     Could say I’ve found myself also with some problems related with
    routing, rendering and fetching, but mostly with the i18n, i18l and
    some documentation related with specific frameworks.

    Routers based on user language, render fetched data to specific
    localization and most important: single age app with an unlimited
    MVVCs took me a lot of time and investigation. Most of the tutorials
    and examples are based on simple single page calls and requests, and
    some of them even aren’t working.

    Of course, one of the things not important that much for internal
    apps is the SEO, but for website accessible by search engines, is
    top priority. And once again, the people behind most of the
    tutorials doesn’t care.

    Great article, just from personal point of view, examples are much
    better if are online and live. People use to understand better the
    concepts when they see it “moving”
    ![:)](http://nerds.airbnb.com/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=12703#respond)

14. Nuno Pato

    6 months ago

    Good post but be carefully with the nomenclature used. When you say
    ‘single-page app that can also be fully rendered on the server-side’
    you mean template rendering, not graphical rendering.

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=13025#respond)

15. Gang Yang

    5 months ago

    All what you desire is ready to use in Flash Platform.

    Flash is controlled by Adobe? How about IE/Chrome? are they open
    source?

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=13238#respond)

16. jhnns

    4 months ago

    Thanks for sharing your thoughts on isomorphic javascript. I’m
    writing (or better: trying to write) isomorphic web-apps for two
    years now and came to almost the same conclusions and ideas you’ve
    pointed out. But there are still many obstacles in the way and I
    think we still don’t know exactly how to write an application that
    is able to run in different environments.

    One conclusion I came to is that large monolithic frameworks like
    meteor don’t tend to have the flexibility to adopt different
    environments. It’s important to note that there is not just one
    single client, you could have several clients for different
    environments (desktop, mobile web-apps, phonegap).

    A modular approach is more flexible and allows the application to
    adopt these environments. But in this case it’s up to the developer
    to loosely couple all components in order to avoid structures like
    if (isServer) { … } else { … } which is one of the most challenging
    tasks.

    By the way: For everyone who is trying to cope with different module
    styles and dynamic code loading there is
    [webpack](https://github.com/webpack/webpack/). It’s capable of AMD
    and CommonJS and provides mechanism to split the code into multiple
    bundles. It’s also possible to define loaders which transform the
    module so it can be shipped to the browser (e.g. css-loader,
    less-loader, jade-loader, etc.).

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=13256#respond)

17. Prem Mohan

    2 months ago

    When are you going to have another Isomorphic JavaScript workshop? I
    have been doing Web UI development from the early days of JavaScript
    – and seen its evolution exactly as you chronicle here. My last
    application was done using single page UI framework using Backbone
    and later Sencha ExtJS. The idea of using JS on both client and
    server has occurred to me several time and led by I played around a
    bit with Node.js. Would be great to know more on this in your next
    workshop.

    Thx.

    [Reply](/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/?replytocom=14827#respond)

**

#### Categories

-   [Code](http://nerds.airbnb.com/code/ "View all posts filed under Code")
-   [Data](http://nerds.airbnb.com/data/ "View all posts filed under Data")
-   [News](http://nerds.airbnb.com/news/ "View all posts filed under News")
-   [Open
    Source](http://nerds.airbnb.com/open-source/ "View all posts filed under Open Source")
-   [Tech
    Talks](http://nerds.airbnb.com/tech-talks/ "We have a bi-weekly series, every other Wednesday at 6pm in our office at 888 Brannan. We have some incredible speakers and topics lined up; people on the cutting edge of new front- and back-end technologies, security experts, talks by our own team about work we're going to be open sourcing, performance and more.")

#### More Airbnb blogs

-   [Airbnb blog](http://blog.airbnb.com)
-   [Public Policy](http://publicpolicy.airbnb.com/)
-   -   [We're
    hiring](https://www.airbnb.com/jobs/departments/engineering)

#### Find Us at

-   [Twitter Nerds](https://twitter.com/AirbnbNerds)
-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/airbnb)
-   [Google+](https://plus.google.com/u/0/+airbnb/posts)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/Airbnb)
-   [YouTube](http://www.youtube.com/airbnb)

© Airbnb, Inc

#### About Airbnb

Airbnb is a global community marketplace that connects travelers seeking
authentic, high-quality accommodations with hosts who offer unique
places to stay.

Find more in our [Sitemap](https://www.airbnb.com/sitemaps)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://nerds.airbnb.com/isomorphic-javascript-future-web-apps/
