Structs and ImmutableStructs
============================

[via raganwald.com](/)
----------------------

* * * * *

Sometimes we want to share objects by reference for performance and
space reasons, but we don’t want them to be mutable. One motivation is
when we want many objects to be able to share a common entity without
worrying that one of them may inadvertently change the common entity.

JavaScript provides a way to make properties *immutable*:

    var rentAmount = {};

    Object.defineProperty(rentAmount, 'dollars', {
      enumerable: true,
      writable: false,
      value: 420
    });

    Object.defineProperty(rentAmount, 'cents', {
      enumerable: true,
      writable: false,
      value: 0
    });

    rentAmount.dollars
      //=> 420


    // Strict Mode:

    !function () {
      "use strict"

      rentAmount.dollars = 600;
    }();
      //=> TypeError: Cannot assign to read only property 'dollars' of #<Object>

    // Beware: Non-Strict Mode

    rentAmount.dollars = 600;
      //=> 600

    rentAmount.dollars
      //=> 420

`Object.defineProperty` is a general-purpose method for providing
fine-grained control over the properties of any object. When we make a
property `enumerable`, it shows up whenever we list the object’s
properties or iterate over them. When we make it writable, assignments
to the property change its value. If the property isn’t writable,
assignments are ignored.

When we want to define multiple properties, we can also write:

    var rentAmount = {};

    Object.defineProperties(rentAmount, {
      dollars: {
        enumerable: true,
        writable: false,
        value: 420
      },
      cents: {
        enumerable: true,
        writable: false,
        value: 0
      }
    });

    rentAmount.dollars
      //=> 420

    rentAmount.dollars = 600;
      //=> 600

    rentAmount.dollars
      //=> 420

We can make properties immutable, but that doesn’t prevent us from
adding properties to an object:

    rentAmount.feedbackComments = []
    rentAmount.feedbackComments.push("The rent is too damn high.")
    rentAmount
      //=>
        { dollars: 420,
          cents: 0,
          feedbackComments: [ 'The rent is too damn high.' ] }

Immutable properties make an object *closed for modification*. This is a
separate matter from making it *closed for extension*. But we can do
that too:

    Object.preventExtensions(rentAmount);

    function addCurrency(amount, currency) {
      "use strict";

      amount.currency = currency;
      return currency;
    }

    addCurrency(rentAmount, "CAD")
      //=> TypeError: Can't add property currency, object is not extensible

### structs

Many other languages have a formal data structure that has one or more
named properties that are open for modification, but closed for
extension. Here’s a function that makes a Struct:

    function Struct (template) {
      if (Struct.prototype.isPrototypeOf(this)) {
        var struct = this;

        Object.keys(template).forEach(function (key) {
          Object.defineProperty(struct, key, {
            enumerable: true,
            writable: true,
            value: template[key]
          });
        });
        return Object.preventExtensions(struct);
      }
      else return new Struct(template);
    }

    var rentAmount2 = Struct({dollars: 420, cents: 0});

    addCurrency(rentAmount2, "ISK");
      //=> TypeError: Can't add property currency, object is not extensible

And when you need an `ImmutableStruct`:

    function ImmutableStruct (template) {

      if (ImmutableStruct.prototype.isPrototypeOf(this)) {
        var immutableObject = this;

        Object.keys(template).forEach(function (key) {
          Object.defineProperty(immutableObject, key, {
            enumerable: true,
            writable: false,
            value: template[key]
          });
        });
        return Object.preventExtensions(immutableObject);
      }
      else return new ImmutableStruct(template);
    }

    ImmutableStruct.prototype = new Struct({});

    function copyAmount(to, from) {
      "use strict"

      to.dollars = from.dollars;
      to.cents   = from.cents;
      return to;
    }

    var immutableRent = ImmutableStruct({dollars: 1000, cents: 0});

    copyAmount(immutableRent, rentAmount);
      //=> TypeError: Cannot assign to read only property 'dollars' of #<Struct>

Structs and Immutable Structs are a handy way to prevent inadvertent
errors and to explicitly communicate that an object is intended to be
used as a struct and not as a dictionary.^[1](#fn:freeze)^

### structural vs. semantic typing

A long-cherished principle of dynamic languages is that programs employ
“Duck” or “Structural” typing. So if we write:

    function deposit (account, instrument) {
      account.dollars += instrument.dollars;
      account.cents   += instrument.cents;
      account.dollars += Math.floor(account.cents / 100);
      account.cents    = account.cents % 100;
      return account;
    }

This works for things that look like cheques, and for things that look
like money orders:^[2](#fn:wellactually)^

    cheque = {
      dollars: 100,
      cents: 0,
      number: 6
    }

    deposit(currentAccount, cheque);

    moneyOrder = {
      dollars: 100,
      cents: 0,
      fee: 1.50
    }

    deposit(currentAccount, moneyOrder);

The general idea here is that as long as we pass `deposit` an
`instrument` that has `dollars` and `cents` properties, the function
will work. We can think about `hasDollarsAndCents` as a “type,” and we
can say that programming in a dynamic language like JavaScript is
programming in a world where there is a many-many relationship between
types and entities.

Every single entity that has `dollars` and `cents` has the imaginary
type `hasDollarsAndCents`, and every single function that takes a
parameter and uses only its `dollars` and `cents` properties is a
function that requires a parameter of type `hasDollarsAndCents`.

There is no checking of this in advance, like some other languages, but
there also isn’t any explicit declaration of these types. They exist
logically in the running system, but not manifestly in the code we
write.

This maximizes flexibility, in that it encourages the creation of small,
independent pieces work seamlessly together. It also makes it easy to
refactor to small, independent pieces. The code above could easily be
changed to something like this:

    cheque = {
      amount: {
        dollars: 100,
        cents: 0
      },
      number: 6
    }

    deposit(currentAccount, cheque.amount);

    moneyOrder = {
      amount: {
        dollars: 100,
        cents: 0
      },
      fee: 1.50
    }

    deposit(currentAccount, moneyOrder.amount);

### drawbacks

This flexibility has a cost. With our ridiculously simple example above,
we can easy deposit new kinds of instruments. But we can also do things
like this:

    var backTaxesOwed = {
      dollars: 10,874,
      cents: 06
    }

    var rentReceipt = {
      dollars: 420,
      cents: 0,
      unit: 504,
      month: 6,
      year: 1962
    }

    deposit(backTaxesOwed, rentReceipt);

Structurally, `deposit` is compatible with any two things that
`haveDollarsAndCents`. But not all things that `haveDollarsAndCents` are
semantically appropriate for deposits. This is why some OO language
communities work very hard developing and using type systems that
incorporate semantics.

This is not just a theoretical concern. Numbers and strings are the
ultimate in semantic-free data types. Confusing metric with imperial
measures is thought to have caused the loss of the [Mars Climate
Orbiter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mars_Climate_Orbiter). To prevent
mistakes like this in software, forcing values to have compatible
semantics–and not just superficially compatible structure–is thought to
help create self-documenting code and to surface bugs.

### semantic structs

We’ve already seen structs, above. `Struct` is a structural type, not a
semantic type. But it can be extended to incorporate the notion of
semantic types by turning it from and object factory into a
“factory-factory.” Here’s a completely new version of `Struct`, we give
it a name and the keys we want, and it gives us a JavaScript constructor
function:

    function Struct () {
      var name = arguments[0],
          keys = [].slice.call(arguments, 1),
          constructor = eval("(function "+name+"(argument) { return initialize.call(this, argument); })");

      function initialize (argument) {
        if (constructor.prototype.isPrototypeOf(this)) {
          var struct = this;

          keys.forEach(function (key) {
            Object.defineProperty(struct, key, {
              enumerable: true,
              writable: true,
              value: argument[key]
            });
          });
          return Object.preventExtensions(struct);
        }
        else return new constructor(argument);
      };

      return constructor;
    }

    var Depositable = Struct('Depositiable', 'dollars', 'cents'),
        RecordOfPayment = Struct('RecordOfPayment', 'dollars', 'cents');

    var cheque = new Depositable({dollars: 420, cents: 0});

    cheque.constructor;
      //=> [Function: Depositiable]

    cheque instanceof Depositable;
      //=> true
    cheque instanceof RecordOfPayment;
      //=> false

Although `Depositable` and `RecordOfPayment` have the same structural
type, they are different semantic types, and we can detect the
difference with `instanceof` (and `Object.isPrototypeOf`).

We can also bake this test into our constructors. The code above uses a
pattern borrowed from [Effective JavaScript](http://effectivejs.com) so
that you can write either `new Depositable(...)` or `Depositable(...)`
and always get a new instance of `Depositable`. This version abandons
that convention in favour of making `Depositable` a prototype check, and
adds an explicit assertion method:

    function Struct () {
      var name = arguments[0],
          keys = [].slice.call(arguments, 1),
          constructor = eval("(function "+name+"(argument) { return initialize.call(this, argument); })");

      function initialize (argument) {
        if (constructor.prototype.isPrototypeOf(this)) {
          var argument = argument,
              struct = this;

          keys.forEach(function (key) {
            Object.defineProperty(struct, key, {
              enumerable: true,
              writable: true,
              value: argument[key]
            });
          });
          return Object.preventExtensions(struct);
        }
        else return constructor.prototype.isPrototypeOf(argument);
      };

      constructor.assertIsPrototypeOf = function (argument) {
        if (!constructor.prototype.isPrototypeOf(argument)) {
          var name = constructor.name === ''
                     ? "Struct(" + keys.join(", ") + ")"
                     : constructor.name;
          throw "Type Error: " + argument + " is not a " + name;
        }
        else return argument;
      }

      return constructor;
    }

    var Depositable = Struct('Depositable', 'dollars', 'cents'),
        RecordOfPayment = Struct('RecordOfPayment', 'dollars', 'cents');

    var cheque = new Depositable({dollars: 420, cents: 0});

    Depositable(cheque);
      //=> true

    RecordOfPayment.assertIsPrototypeOf(cheque);
      //=> Type Error: [object Object] is not a RecordOfPayment

We can use these “semantic” structs by adding assertions to critical
functions:

    function deposit (account, instrument) {
      Depositable.assertIsPrototypeOf(instrument);

      account.dollars += instrument.dollars;
      account.cents   += instrument.cents;
      account.dollars += Math.floor(account.cents / 100);
      account.cents    = account.cents % 100;
      return account;
    }

This prevents us from accidentally trying to deposit a rent receipt.

> With few exceptions, a programming system cannot be improved solely by
> removing features that can be subject to abuse.

### is semantic typing worthwhile?

The value of semantic typing is an open question. There are its
proponents, and its detractors. One thing to consider is the proposition
that with few exceptions, a programming system cannot be improved solely
by removing features that can be subject to abuse.

Instead, a system is improved by removing harmful features in such a way
that they enable the addition of other, more powerful features that were
“blocked” by the existence of harmful features. For example, proper or
“pure” functional programming languages do not allow the mutation of
values. This does remove a number of harmful possibilities, but in and
of itself removing mutation is not a win.

However, once you remove mutation you enable a number of optimization
techniques such as lazy evaluation. This frees programmers to do things
like write code for data structures that would not be possible in
languages (like JavaScript) that have an eager evaluation strategy.

If we subscribe to this philosophy about only reducing flexibility when
it enables us to make an even greater increase in flexibility, then
structural typing cannot be not be a win solely because we can “catch
errors earlier” with things like
`Depositable.assertIsPrototypeOf(instrument)`. To be of benefit, it must
enable some completely new kind of programming paradigm or feature that
increases overall flexibility.

### are immutable structs worthwhile?

Taking this same reasoning to immutable structures, some would argue
that the extra infrastructure required to create immutable structs is
not warranted if the sole objective is to prevent inadvertent errors.

To be of benefit, immutable data structures (like immutable structs) are
only of benefit is we can “turn them up to eleven” and realize some new
benefit, if we incorporate paradigms like
[copy-on-write](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copy-on-write) and build
high-performance and high-reliability code around immutable data.

Funny we should mention that. The Clojure and ClojureScript people have
systematized the use of immutable data. And we can incorporate their
libraries in our JavaScript code using the
[Mori](http://swannodette.github.io/mori/) Javascript library.

Have a look at Mori. Then consider whether immutable structs could be
useful in your code.

(discuss on
[reddit](http://www.reddit.com/r/javascript/comments/28gycg/structs_and_immutablestructs/)
and [hacker news](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7911134))

* * * * *

1.  JavaScript also provides a single method that can close an objetc
    for modification, extension, and configuration at the same time:
    `Object.freeze(...)`. [↩](#fnref:freeze)

2.  There’re good things we can say about why we should consider making
    an `amount` property, and/or encapsulate these structs so they
    behave like objects, but this gives the general idea of structural
    typing. [↩](#fnref:wellactually)

[Follow @raganwald](https://twitter.com/raganwald)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

\
\
 Generated by [GitHub Pages](http://pages.github.com) from a [public
repo](https://github.com/raganwald/raganwald.github.com). [Pull
requests](https://github.com/raganwald/raganwald.github.com/pulls) and
[issues](https://github.com/raganwald/raganwald.github.com/issues) are
welcome.\
 Tactile theme by [Jason Long](http://twitter.com/jasonlong). [Some
rights reserved](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).
[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/4.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://raganwald.com/2014/06/15/immutable-structs.html
