[Visit Aeon Film](http://aeon.co/film)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Follow us [](https://twitter.com/#!/aeonmag)
[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)

Daily or Weekly

-   Search
-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about)
-   [Film](http://aeon.co/film)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon Magazine")

Daily Weekly

Newsletter

[](https://twitter.com/aeonmag)
[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)

-   [World Views](http://aeon.co/magazine/world-views/ "World Views")
-   [Nature &
    Cosmos](http://aeon.co/magazine/nature-and-cosmos/ "Nature and Cosmos")
-   [Being Human](http://aeon.co/magazine/being-human/ "Being Human")
-   [Living
    Together](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/ "Living Together")
-   [Altered
    States](http://aeon.co/magazine/altered-states/ "Altered States")

The lottocracy
==============

Elections are flawed and can't be redeemed – it’s time to start choosing
our representatives by lottery

by [Alexander
Guerrero](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/alexander-guerrero/ "Read more articles by Alexander Guerrero")
3,500 words

-   Read later or Kindle
    -   -   -   -   ![image](https://d1xnn692s7u6t6.cloudfront.net/white-15.png)Kindle

![It could be you; in the House Chamber for the State of The Union
address. Photo by Pete Souza/The White
House/Corbis](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2014/01/House-of-Reps.jpg)

It could be you; in the House Chamber for the State of The Union
address. *Photo by Pete Souza/The White House/Corbis*

[Alexander
Guerrero](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/alexander-guerrero/ "Read more articles by Alexander Guerrero")
is an assistant professor of philosophy, medical ethics and health
policy at the University of Pennsylvania.

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/forget-elections-lets-pick-reps-by-lottery/#comments)

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/forget-elections-lets-pick-reps-by-lottery/#comments)

It is easy to feel that what you do won’t make any difference. Recycle
that can, bike or drive, buy from this company not that one, march in
the streets against the factory closing or the looming war. It’s never
enough: the forces are large and anonymous, and there aren’t enough of
us. Or there are too many of us. Vote, petition, protest. It can all
feel pointless: a kind of precious dancing around, keeping a low causal
profile, with an eye on some imaginary Future Judgment. How clean my
hands are! How little of the world’s horror has been made by them!

But we don’t care about that. We care about the horror: the
steady-warming planet; the children born into hard, sad futures; the
millions of homeless, and hungry, and unjustly imprisoned; the growing
gap between the rich and the poor in Philadelphia, Kansas, and Kentucky,
in Moscow, Ghana, and Paris. The problem, at bottom, is that we feel
that we can’t make a difference. Ethically and politically, we are
ghosts in a machine.

The celebrity comic Russell Brand is gesticulating wildly, urgently, in
a hotel room, under the bright lights of a television interview. ‘Stop
voting, stop pretending, wake up. Be in reality now. Why vote? We know
it’s not going to make any difference. We know that already.’ He is
responding to his interviewer, Jeremy Paxman, who is taking him to task
for never having voted.

We are brought up to think that voting is important, that it is a
necessary condition of being a politically serious person, that we can’t
complain about politics if we don’t vote. This last principle has echoes
of the more reasonable parental admonition, said of lima beans or
cauliflower: don’t knock it until you’ve tried it. But that principle is
based on sound epistemological grounds: you might, for all you know,
like cauliflower or lima beans. The voting thing is, as Brand argues,
stupid. There are ways of participating in public affairs other than
voting. For example, one can become a celebrity and call for revolution
in a television interview.

More to the point, the inference from not voting to not caring is a poor
one. As Brand points out, you might care a lot about what happens and
what the system is doing, but still realise that voting doesn’t affect
what happens or what the system does. In most elections, the chance that
your vote will make any difference to who wins is much smaller than the
chance that you will be hit by a car on the way to cast your vote. But
people still turn out to vote. They even drive through snow, miss work,
and wait in line for hours.

This has puzzled political scientists and economists. Why *do* people
vote? This is an empirical question; it concerns our actual motivations.
Many answers have been given: we vote because we enjoy it; because we
think others will think badly of us if we don’t; because we want to
express ourselves; or cheer for our team; or because we believe that we
have a duty to do so. One worry about all of these answers is that they
seem disconnected from what makes voting seem so morally significant,
something that it might be worth fighting and dying for the right to do.

In the modern world, we often find ourselves in the following situation.
I know that whether I do X rather than Y won’t make a difference by
itself. I also know that everyone else knows this about me and about
themselves. I also know that if all of us do X, rather than Y, it *will*
make a difference. And everyone else knows this, too. So it’s striking
and surprising that a celebrity such as Brand would come out and say, to
millions, ‘Don’t vote,’ rather than ‘Vote for X.’ That was the
revolutionary part of the interview. A thousand lefty celebrities have
gone on TV and advocated for causes. Very few have gone on TV and said
‘Don’t vote.’ Very few have gone on TV and said, essentially, X and Y
can both go fuck themselves.

One reason not to vote is that your vote — your one vote — is unlikely
to make a difference to who wins the election. Another reason not to
vote is that *it doesn’t matter who wins the election*, that there is no
difference between X and Y, republican and democrat, Tory and Labour. An
extreme version of this thesis — which is obviously false — is that
there is *no* difference between our Xs and our Ys. Much more plausible
versions of this thesis are that there is *not enough* difference
between our Xs and Ys, or that with respect to *some* important issues
there is no difference between our Xs and Ys.

Brand’s view is clear: ‘I’m not [refusing to vote] out of *apathy*,’ he
says. ‘I’m not voting out of absolute indifference and weariness and
exhaustion from the lies, treachery, deceit of the political class that
has been going on for generations.’ Brand says that many of us don’t
engage with the current political system, because we see that it doesn’t
work for us, we see that it makes no difference. ‘The apathy doesn’t
come from us, the people,’ he says. ‘The apathy comes from the
politicians. They are apathetic to our needs. They are only interested
in servicing the needs of corporations.’

Is this true? Why would this be? Wasn’t the whole point of democratic
elections to ensure that power would be in the hands of the people?

The theory of modern representative democracy goes something like this.
Each of us is fundamentally autonomous and of equal moral worth, so that
we have a claim to self-government, self-rule, to the extent that such
self-government is compatible with an equal right to self-government of
others.

This suggests something like direct democracy, in which each of us would
have an equal say in determining whether we go to war, what policies and
laws to adopt, what should be taxed and how much taxes should be, and so
on. But — we quickly realise — modern politics is very complex; it is a
full-time job to be even modestly well-informed about political issues.
Ideally, one would spend all of one’s time doing it, in addition to
having staff and resources to help. This suggests a move from *direct*
democracy to *representative* democracy, where we would each have an
equal vote in choosing that individual whom we think will best represent
our interests and views. That person will act as our representative —
and not as an elected tyrant — because to stay in power, she or he will
have to be re-elected. If our representatives do things that we don’t
like, we can vote them out. That’s the theory, and its simplicity and
power — and the successes of actual electoral representative democracies
— have led representative democracy to be the ascendant and unrivalled
political system around the world.

So, what’s the problem? The problem is that despite the elections,
elected representatives are not actually accountable, not meaningfully
accountable, to those over whom they govern.

> There are logistical hurdles to keep poor, marginalised citizens from
> successfully registering to vote

Even in established democracies there are concerns about the openness
and fairness of elections. There are huge financial barriers to running
for office, and considerable advantages to incumbency. Corporate money
and television advertising have an outsized influence. There are
logistical hurdles to keep poor, marginalised citizens from successfully
registering to vote, and gerrymandering reduces competition,
considerably. These difficulties all reduce how accountable our
representatives are to us.

Even if these problems were addressed, they would succeed only in making
elections fair. But meaningful accountability requires not just open and
fair elections; it also requires that we are capable**of engaging in
*informed* monitoring and evaluation of the decisions of our
representatives. And we are not capable of this. Not because we are
stupid, but because we are ignorant: ignorant about what our
representatives are doing, ignorant about the details of complex
political issues, and ignorant about whether what our representative is
doing is good for us or for the world.

Our ignorance means that representatives can talk a good game, and maybe
even try to do a few things that benefit the majority of us, but the
basic information asymmetries at the heart of the representative system
ensure that, for many issues — defence manufacturing and spending,
policy that affects the insurance and pharmaceutical industries,
agribusiness policy and regulation, energy policy, regulation of
financial services and products — what we get is what the relevant
business industries want. In the presence of widespread citizen
ignorance and the absence of meaningful accountability, powerful
interests will effectively capture representatives, ensuring that the
only viable candidates — the only people who can get and stay in
political power — are those who will act in ways that are congenial to
the interests of the powerful.

These concerns are brought to the fore if we think about how little we
know about most of what our representatives do, how little real choice
goes into the election of our representatives, and how much deference to
the goodwill of our favoured political party is required. Even when we
step outside partisan information streams, most issues are complex, and
much of what we believe about them is a result of information provided
by a few dominant media institutions. But there might be a way to
overcome these difficulties, if we rethink the fundamentals of democracy
itself.

One response to these problems is to go small. In a small community,
collective action problems are less prevalent, and can be solved
organically. We can detect and shun violators or freeloaders. And
information asymmetries disappear: I know the issues and problems that
affect us, as do you. We understand their complexities. They are within
our daily life. If we need to use representatives for some reason, we
will know them personally, as friends or neighbours. We can easily see
what they do.

One difficulty with this response is that it is not obvious how to go
small. We know we can make a difference by connecting to people in more
direct ways: talking to people we see during our day, providing food and
shelter for local families, teaching in a prison. But it can be hard to
see how our political communities can be made smaller in this way. And
many of us are hard-pressed for time, energy, and the resources to make
these efforts.

Worse still, the going small strategy can seem inadequate when compared
with the forces at hand, the foundations of the horror. We are globally
connected now. We can’t roll back the technological development and
population increases that threaten the planet, and make it so that my
small choices and your small choices all have such large, global
effects. This is where the political system is supposed to be of help,
but our system is broken.

Political systems are a kind of technology, inventions of human beings
to bring about things we care about: peace, prosperity, freedom.
Representative democracy is old technology. It dates back to the Roman
Republic. Russell Brand says don’t vote, the system is broken, and I
think he’s right: we do need a new system. But it is important to stress
that in saying that, one needn’t be committed to the view that
everything is awful. It’s not. Modern democratic governments do many
things well, even if imperfectly: food safety and quality control,
traffic safety and road maintenance, regulation and enforcement of
building and zoning codes, public health crisis response, air-travel
regulation, antitrust and market competition regulation, hospital and
health care support, energy and telecommunications regulation, civil
court systems, public libraries and basic public education, police and
fire protection, support for basic and applied scientific research.

It’s true that for each item I just listed, there are 20 legitimate,
serious complaints that could be made about the way some particular
government handles that responsibility. It’s also true that modern
governments collect an extraordinary amount of money in taxes, so it
should be no surprise that some things get done. Still, it would be a
mistake to think that representative democracy is a disaster. It’s good,
but that shouldn’t keep us from trying to make an even better system by
paying attention to the ways in which it falls short.

Electoral representative democracy has undergone a great many changes
since it came on the scene. We’ve seen a steady increase in
constitutionalism and proportional representation. We’ve seen
multi-member districts and non-geographic districting become popular,
along with publicly financed campaigns in some places, and the rise of
the administrative state. These changes have offered substantial
improvements, but it is now time to reform the heart of the system: the
election. Modern policy is too complex for there to be meaningful
electoral accountability. Electoral capture is too easy and too
important for powerful interests. So, what’s the alternative? Get rid of
elections. Use lotteries to select political officials.

There is historical precedent for this kind of method, also referred to
as ‘sortition’. There are also a number of academics who have argued for
a role for lotteries in the selection of political officials, including
C L R James, Oliver Dowlen, and Peter Stone. In ancient Athens, the
birthplace of democracy, lottery-selection was used to choose political
actors in three of its four major governmental institutions. Selection
of political officials in late medieval and early renaissance Italy
incorporated selection by lot. More recently, Citizens’ Assemblies (in
which citizens were chosen at random to serve on the assembly, and in
which citizens heard from experts prior to coming up with their own
proposals) were used in the Netherlands to reform election law, and in
Canada (in British Columbia and Ontario). Randomly chosen citizens were
also brought into the process of constitutional reform in Iceland in
2010, but nothing of the scope that I am envisioning has been tried
before.

There are hard questions about how exactly to structure a political
system with lottery-selection at its heart. Here’s one approach, which I
am in the process of developing, that I call *lottocracy*. The basic
components are straightforward. First, rather than having a single,
generalist legislature such as the United States Congress, the
legislative function would be fulfilled by many different *single-issue*
legislatures (each one focusing on, for example, just agriculture or
health care). There might be 20 or 25 of these single-issue
legislatures, perhaps borrowing existing divisions in legislative
committees or administrative agencies: agriculture, commerce and
consumer protection, education, energy, health and human services,
housing and urban development, immigration, labour, transportation, etc.

> People would not be required to serve if selected, but the financial
> incentive would be significant

These single-issue legislatures would be chosen by lottery from the
political jurisdiction, with each single-issue legislature consisting of
300 people. Each person chosen would serve for a three-year term. Terms
would be staggered so that each year 100 new people begin, and 100
people finish. All adult citizens in the political jurisdiction would be
eligible to be selected. People would not be required to serve if
selected, but the financial incentive would be significant, efforts
would be made to accommodate family and work schedules, and the civic
culture might need to be developed so that serving is seen as a
significant civic duty and honour. In a normal year-long legislative
session, the 300 people would develop an agenda of the legislative issue
or two they would work on for that session, they’d hear from experts and
stakeholders with respect to those issues, there would be opportunities
for gathering community input and feedback, and they would eventually
vote to enact legislation or alter existing legislation.

Single-issue focus is essential to allow greater learning and engagement
with the particular problems, especially given the range of backgrounds
that members would bring to the institutions, and the fact that these
individuals would be amateurs at the particular task of creating
legislation. Lottery-chosen representatives would have more time to
learn about the problems they’re legislating than today’s typical
representatives, who have to spend their time learning about every topic
under the sun, while also constantly travelling, claiming credit, and
raising funds to get re-elected. In the lottocratic system
representatives will be — at least over a long enough run —
descriptively and proportionately representative of the political
community, simply because they have been chosen at random. But they will
not have in mind the idea that they are to represent some particular
constituency. Instead, they will be like better-informed versions of
ourselves, coming from backgrounds like ours, but with the opportunity
to learn and deliberate about the specific topic at hand.

No pure lottocratic system has ever existed, and so it’s important to
note that much could go wrong. Randomly chosen representatives could
prove to be incompetent or easily bewildered. Maybe a few people would
dominate the discussions. Maybe the experts brought in to inform the
policymaking would all be bought off and would convince us to buy the
same corporate-sponsored policy we’re currently getting. There are hard
design questions about how such a legislative system would interact with
other branches of government, and questions about the coherence of
policymaking, budgeting, taxation, and enforcement of policy. That said,
it’s worth remembering the level of dysfunction that exists in the
current system. We should be thinking about comparative improvement, not
perfection, and a lottocratic system would have a number of advantages
over the current model.

The most obvious advantage of lotteries is that they help to prevent
corruption or undue influence in the selection of representatives.
Because members are chosen at random and don’t need to run for office,
there will be no way for powerful interests to influence who becomes a
representative to ensure that the only viable candidates are those whose
interests are congenial to their own. Because there is no need to raise
funds for re-election, it should be easier to monitor representatives to
ensure that they are not being bought off.

> 44 per cent of US Congresspersons have a net worth of more than $1
> million; 82 per cent are male; 86 per cent are white, and more than
> half are lawyers or bankers

Another advantage of lotteries over elections is that they are likely to
bring together a more cognitively diverse group of people, a group of
people with a better sense of the full range of views and interests of
the polity. Because individuals are chosen at random from the
jurisdiction, they are much more likely to be an ideologically,
demographically, and socio-economically representative sample of the
people in the jurisdiction than those individuals who are capable of
successfully running for office. As a point of comparison, 44 per cent
of US Congresspersons have a net worth of more than $1 million; 82 per
cent are male; 86 per cent are white, and more than half are lawyers or
bankers. Recent empirical work by Scott Page and Lu Hong has
demonstrated that cognitively diverse groups of people are likely to
produce better decisions than smarter, or more skilled, groups that are
cognitively homogenous.

Elections lead elected officials to focus on those problems for which
they can claim credit for addressing, and to ignore or put on the back
burner those problems with a longer horizon or those solutions for which
it is harder to get credit. This negligence is made possible by voter
ignorance and made inevitable by the perverse short-term incentives that
elections provide. Lottery selection can help us to avoid this problem.

Perhaps the most urgent issue we face is climate change, a complex
collective action problem that will almost certainly require a political
solution to solve. But many of the worst effects of climate change won’t
be realised for decades, and so politicians are unlikely to pay the
short-term political cost given that they won’t see the longer-term
political benefits. Even when there are clear steps that need to be
taken, many elected officials will avoid acting out of fear of the
immediate consequences. Individuals chosen at random won’t be hamstrung
by these skewed incentives. If there is agreement on a viable solution,
to climate change or to the myriad other issues that affect our children
and grandchildren, lottocratic representatives will have the luxury of
looking beyond this week’s poll or next week’s fund-raiser.

This task of radically redesigning government is usually dismissed as
utopianism, but there is no reason to think that electoral
representative democracy can’t be improved upon, just like every other
kind of technology. Of course, one must be aware of limitations in the
materials; we must think critically and carefully about what we know,
what we have learned from psychology, economics, history, political
science, law, and philosophy. And we have to be mindful of the dangers
that attend our tinkering. Some of the worst horrors of the 20th century
were the result of political design projects gone terribly wrong. So, we
must tread carefully and take small steps. But we can't continue to
stand still.

*23 January 2014*

[](#top)

*Read more essays on
[democracy](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/democracy/),
[Government](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/government/) and
[Politics](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/politics/)*

Comments

-   atimoshenko

    Excellent idea. Maybe add in a safety mechanism through which the
    citizenry can kick out/recall a legislative body should it go off
    the deep-end before its term is up (with a new one again selected by
    lottery), and you'd have a system that will without a doubt work
    better than anything that exists in the world today.

-   henry

    William F. Buckley, I think (hope), would agree.

-   Lester

    An Excellent idea.

    And, much like how systems evolve throughout history, there is no
    need to produce a perfect and infallible blueprint, but rather to
    apply the concepts and adapt them with the process.

    The question of implementation looms. How do we go about
    implementing this (or other progressive and excellent ideas) when
    such immense power is bearing down aimed at continuing the current
    paradigm? We know we need change. We have the ideas to create
    change. How do we go about dismantling the system and making space
    for change?

    -   Lucas Grange

        a good place to start testing this out would be in student
        politics. see how it goes there, and also has the uptick of
        getting the lottocracy system into peoples brains

-   TomJV

    It is interesting to read this article so soon after the Flemish
    writer David van Reybrouck wrote a small book also pleading for
    sortition which has resulted in quite some debate in the Dutch
    language area.\
     Concerning Guerrero's proposal I think that it is lacking in two
    ways. First, his "single-issue-ism". Policy areas aren't neatly
    separated - for example, foreign, development, trade and health
    policy all overlap. Adhering to a view of politics as consisten of a
    set of issues which should be governed through policies indicates a
    quite limited view of what politics actually is. Second, pure
    polities might seem nice, but they aren't. It would be better to
    combine such aspects as sortition, representation, and
    participation.\
     But a very good and necessary article nonetheless.

    -   Lee Napier

        -"But a very good and necessary article nonetheless."

        You're an idiot.

        -   Greg Petliski

            No you're not. I agree, its like John Muir said "Whenever
            you try and pick out anything by itself, you find it hitched
            to everything else in the universe." I think the idea could
            still work as long as there is communication between the
            groups.

            -   marxmarv

                Well, how does one handle conflicting interests?
                Competition only guarantees that someone will lose, and
                how many other ways do average Americans really care to,
                or even know how to, handle conflicts?

                Never mind the lobbyists. Worry about the parties.

        -   TomJV

            If you put it like that then I am completely convinced of
            course.

-   Andrew

    This reminds me a lot of how we handle jury selection here in the
    US:\
     potential jurors are chosen at random (typically from voter
    registration\
     lists!). Many people try (often successfully) to get out of
    serving.\
     As a result, I often hear complaints that people who actually do
    serve\
     on the jury are not an accurate cross-section of the population,
    but\
     rather, representative of those who lack the wherewithal to be
    excused.\
     One thing that is lacking from your proposal is the idea that the
    jury\
     is sequestered, free from outside influence, during their
    deliberations,\
     so only evidence presented publicly in the courtroom can\
     (theoretically) affect their decisions. However, I doubt that your\
     appointed problem-solvers would be willing to be isolated from
    their\
     family, friends or the rest of the outside world for their entire\
     three-year terms! Therefore, you'd need an alternate method to be\
     certain that the decision-makers aren't being unduly influenced by\
     powerful outsiders. I don't think that eliminating concerns about\
     re-election would accomplish this, because there are too many
    other\
     influencing factors, both positive and negative.

-   http://samnabi.com/ Sam Nabi

    Well done, this is a bold and inspiring vision for future
    government. The question that intrigues me most is how to decide the
    scope of each legislature? Who makes that decision, and what form of
    democracy is used to set up the structure of the lottocracy? And how
    can the structure itself be changed?

    Admittedly, this is getting in the weeds — but it could have big
    ramifications for climate change policy. Say there's a legislature
    that deals with "Fisheries and Oceans" (we have a Department of
    Fisheries and Oceans here in Canada, so it would seem a logical
    transition). Say there's a bill proposing big tariffs on cargo ships
    to reduce traffic volumes, and in turn prevent pollution and protect
    biodiversity. Okay. That might cripple the fishing industry. But at
    least the fishing folks can bring that into the debate and vote on
    it. But what about the Finance legislature? Manufacturing? Surely
    they'd want a say.

    So who decides whether they get a say or not? And how do we make
    sure that legislatures stay within the confines of their area of
    expertise?

-   thurbeb

    I had actually been thinking about this, this week. If congress was
    more like jury selection , the representatives would be more like
    the people they should server, than the rich folks that currently
    reside in the in those seats, thereby making better representatives.
    Since the salary of a congressional seat is more than most people
    make anyway, it would be a bit like winning a 2 year salary.

-   tiredoftea

    Changing how representatives get to a governing body, Congress,
    Senate, state representatives, etc., is worth looking at, but it
    doesn't solve the actual problem, which is the pernicious effects of
    the moneyed interests. Having naive citizen lottery winners might
    very well make the laws coming from Congress more skewed in favor of
    special interests. After all, who would not want an all expenses
    paid trip to some fabulous place to listen to why some special
    interest (corporate, political, conservative, liberal) has the best
    solution to whatever narrow issue is being considered?

    No, we need absolute sunshine in the political lives of every
    elected representative, or government official, including to a
    limited extent, their family members, friends and business
    associates, no matter how they get to public office.

    This "sunshine" will expose any money or in kind donations, will
    extend to gifts and jobs to family, will open calendars to declare
    who they are meeting with, when, where, what the topic is, who they
    represent, how much they contributed to the officeholder and how the
    officeholder voted on any relevant and subsequent bills to the
    meeting attendee.

    Until we clean up and expose the "mother's milk" of politics, we
    cannot expect a change of faces and how they get to a privileged
    position to make much difference to the outcome of law making
    bodies. And, this effort can start in the next election simply by
    asking all candidates fro office to sign the "Sunshine Pledge" as
    described above. This personal act will make our current
    representative democracy truly representative of our interests
    without having to overhaul our election system or wait for some
    committee to approve the concept.

-   Souldiernour

    The united states congress is a farce and is detrimental to the
    country as they do not represent the best interests of the people of
    the united states as a whole and would rather represent the
    corporations who put them
    there(www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/cost-u-s-senate-seat-10-5-million-article-1.1285491)\

    ([http://theweek.com/article/index/235977/the-multibillion-dollar-2012-election-by-the-numbers](http://theweek.com/article/index/235977/the-multibillion-dollar-2012-election-by-the-numbers))
    checks and balances are a myth a great show, nothing works the Reps
    and Sens do not read the bills, and SCOTUS passes unconstitutional
    bills, coerced, bought, or bribed bunch of mobsters. But they need
    to keep the American myth alive to maintain the military industrial
    complex. Their system depends on America being perceived as a
    democracy. It's not a democracy, It was never meant to be a
    democracy, just a humble freedom loving republic.

    -   marxmarv

        Only for the landed gentry, though, and as for humble, citation
        needed.

-   Chris Berntson

    made me think of this

-   Antonia

    Excellent article, although I'm surprised you don't mention the
    system by its name: demarchy. The debate on its validity has
    produced a healthy number of articles and books.

-   IsraelCaballero

    Has anyone read "La lotería de Babilonia" by Borges?

    "That silent functioning, like God's, inspires all manner of
    conjectures. One scurrilously suggests that the Company ceased to
    exist hundreds of years ago, and that the sacred disorder of our
    lives is purely hereditary, traditional; another believes that the
    Company is eternal, and teaches that it shall endure until the last
    night, when the last god shall annihilate the earth. Yet another
    declares that the Company is omnipotent, but affects only small
    things: the cry of a bird, the shades of rust and dust, the half
    dreams that come at dawn. Another, whispered by masked heresiarchs,
    says that the Company has never existed, and never will. Another, no
    less despicable, argues that it makes no difference whether one
    affirms or denies the reality of the shadowy corporation, because
    Babylon is nothing but an infinite game of chance."

-   http://avangionq.stumbleupon.com/ AvangionQ

    Elections are flawed, agreed \~ but can't be redeemed, that's just
    wrong. There's a rather easy way to fix elections: on the ballot,
    drop the party the candidates are representing, add a list of their
    top10 most important issues, and how they plan on voting thereon \~
    instant fix, as people will vote for the issues that matter to them.

    -   rednip

        Who decides what that is on that top ten list? Who decides what
        laws back up that list?

        The idea that one can 'instantly fix' anything as complex as
        society or government is one of the biggest fallacies of the
        modern world.

        -   http://avangionq.stumbleupon.com/ AvangionQ

            Each candidate would select his or her own top10 list. Laws
            would be passed by Congress the same way as always. Also,
            I'm pretty sure this system would fix our politics in a
            hurry, if not instantly upon the completion of the next
            election cycle.

            -   marxmarv

                Great, so they get to put their political communications
                on the ballot. That's the opposite of accountability: if
                they can't be compelled in a binding fashion to either
                vote as the people demand or vacate their office, you're
                still just electing kings piecemeal.

                Vested authority is the problem, not the solution.

-   NeverGetOutOfTheBoat

    The problem I see is that such a system would enhance the sense of
    disenfranchisement of the governed population. The problem Guerrero
    points out, the individual sense of being a part of the governmental
    system, is a very real one. However, that is the one strength of a
    representative democracy, is that it ensures, for the most part,
    that the governed populace consent to the legitimacy of the
    government through the principle of the individual vote.

    Under Guerrero's system, this sense of ownership is lost, which may
    add more legitimacy to internal resistance, violent or otherwise.
    Additionally, it also holds the problem of trying to find citizens
    willing to defend and enforce the rules under such a system. Good
    luck trying to find people willing to join a military force whose
    ultimate authorities are determined by a lotto.

    The one area of government that I could see a lotto being a boon is
    in manning independent election commissions every 10 years (or
    another determined periodic time) to determine voting district
    boundaries. The process of gerrymandering by incumbents is too
    blatant a conflict of interest to function legitimately. Guerrero's
    lotto solution is ideally suited for this purpose. The other side of
    the coin is to some extent embrace smallness, at least in the US
    House of Representatives, and other representative legislative
    bodies, by mandating a much smaller representative to citizen ratio.
    See this
    article:[http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/24/opinion/24conley.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/24/opinion/24conley.html).

-   Jim Dawkins

    Heck If we go that far we should require a political IQ test as
    well. Too many ill informed voters basing everything on media
    rhetoric, aesthetics and celebrity.

-   http://suijurisforum.com/ noone special

    More statism.... Look at the shiny new package it's in though!

-   rednip

    This idea is basically 'term limits on steroids'. No one would ever
    serve more than one term and those who do serve would likely never
    again hold any public office. In that world the only ones who'd have
    any clue about government would be the bureaucrats and lobbyists.

-   deepseer

    change the tax code...you don't vote, you don't get tax breaks. I
    guess this author has decided that it's too hard to amend the
    constitution too.

-   Alex Guerrero

    Hi Everyone. Thanks for the comments. I thought I'd respond to a
    few, although of course there is much to be said, and much more to
    be thought about!

    Antonia and TomJV: There are indeed a number of different people who
    have been working on this (and of course the basic idea itself is
    very old), and they have done so under different headings. Many
    working on the topic prefer the term "sortition" (to contrast with
    election), but I worry that leaves the difference of mechanism
    relatively obscure, and has unfortunate echoes of both "sordid" and
    "sedition." John Burnheim appropriated the term "demarchy" from
    Hayek to refer to the system he develops in his fascinating and
    wide-ranging book "Is Democracy Possible?" (you can read the whole
    thing for free here:
    [http://ses.library.usyd.edu.au/bitstream/2123/2402/1/Frontmatter-is\_democracy\_possible.pdf](http://ses.library.usyd.edu.au/bitstream/2123/2402/1/Frontmatter-is_democracy_possible.pdf)
    ). Others like the term "klerostocracy" for its Greek roots.

    I would have liked to mention the many others who are engaged as
    activists and academics in thinking about using lotteries in
    politics, but these pieces have a less academic tone, and so that
    got cut. Other people whose work you might track down, if you're
    interested, include, in the UK (Anthony Barnett, Peter Carty, Oliver
    Dowlen, Ben Saunders, Peter Stone, Keith Sutherland), in the US
    (Terrill Bouricius, Ernest Callenbach, Hélène Landemore, Ethan Leib,
    Neil McCormick, Kevin O’Leary, Michael Phillips, Alex Zakaras), in
    Canada (Mark Warren and Hilary Pearse), the Australian philosopher
    John Burnheim, the late Afro-Trinidadian philosopher C.L.R. James,
    Paul Lucardie in the Netherlands, Yoram Gat in Israel, the French
    activist Étienne Chouard, the political party Partido Azar in Spain,
    Belgian MP Laurent Louis and the Youth Parliament of Belgium—all
    have argued for the use of lottery selection in politics, in various
    forms and to various degrees.

    There is a fantastic blog, Equality by Lot, that has lively
    discussion of the use of lottery in politics:
    [http://equalitybylot.wordpress.com/](http://equalitybylot.wordpress.com/)

    TomJV and Sam Nabi: On the individuation of issues problem... Yes,
    it is true that policy problems don't always come neatly separated.
    On the other hand, most current systems already involve lots of this
    division into issues, both in the form of sub-committees within
    legislatures, and in the form of the division of administrative
    agencies. See, for example, the division of federal agencies in the
    United States:
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List\_of\_United\_States\_federal\_agencies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_United_States_federal_agencies)

    Still, I do see this as a worry. One possible institutional solution
    would be to allow these single-issue legislatures to merge in some
    instances, or to deal with issues in stages. (For the whole system,
    there is the question of monitoring and making sure a particular
    randomly chosen group stays in its lane. There will almost certainly
    need to be something like a constitutional structure in the
    background--whether written or unwritten--and some institution,
    whether a Supreme Court or a randomly chosen 'meta-assembly',
    charged with making sure that the randomly chosen assemblies do not
    do things beyond their authority.) In the background to your comment
    I hear something, too, about how issues come to be seen as issues in
    a particular polity--how the agenda gets created. And that's also
    something that is worth thinking about. One possibility is that
    there could be a randomly selected group or series of groups that
    also is responsible for figuring out how the issues should be
    divided up in the first place. Another possibility is to let the
    agenda itself be set through more direct democratic means. Lots of
    possibilities to consider. And it's worth considering what political
    parties will look like and do in a world of random selection.

    rednip: On the term limits/naive legislator issue... this is
    something that I've worried about, but I think there are reasons
    that random selection is much better than elections plus strict term
    limits. In the latter case, there still is the question of being
    viable as a candidate, which is often about playing nicely with
    corporate powers.

    As several people have suggested (Andrew, others), there's also the
    continued question of policing the influence of those lobbyists and
    corporate powers (quarantining the randomly selected, policing
    expert classification, etc.), something which one could do in either
    system, but which (for the aforementioned reason about no elections)
    should be easier in the lottocratic system. Why should they be
    talking to the randomly chosen folks at all? It's true I envision
    interaction with experts, activists, and stakeholders, and lobbying
    types might make themselves fit into those categories, but I'm also
    envisioning strict disclosure requirements in terms of where they
    get their money from, and I would think that would undercut some of
    the abilities of those folks to persuade the randomly chosen. It is
    an interesting question how much quarantining will be possible, how
    long people will need to spend in a physical place away from home
    (maybe none in a virtually equipped future?), and how much
    post-office holding monitoring will be permissible to make sure that
    the randomly chosen are not 'rewarded' (bought off) with nice trips,
    plush jobs, etc. after they have concluded their service. Much of
    this seems to be in-principle possible, although implementation is
    always the key. It's also worth stressing how much more costly and
    difficult it will be to buy off lots of randomly selected people
    (who might each be getting a million a year to serve, assuming they
    abide by the rules), rather than just one Senator who will be in
    office for 40 years.

    There is a real worry about newbies interacting with seasoned
    politicians and lobbyists, particularly given the evidence
    concerning the 'bureaucratic capture' of administrative agencies, so
    that recent short-term political appointees are routinely blocked
    from getting their way by the much more knowledgeable long-term
    bureaucrats, who might not share the appointees point of view. There
    is also the worry raised by the possibility of the randomly chosen
    legislature interacting with a long term politically expert
    executive or administrative state. The 'enforcement' side of policy
    is always hard on this front. I'm not sure it's any worse with the
    lottocratic system, but it might be... There might also be
    institutional fixes: having some people have longer terms, so that
    there are 'veteran' randomly selected people, having randomly
    selected bodies in an enforcement oversight role, etc. But these are
    definitely the kinds of things I'm interested in thinking about.

    Anyway, thanks for the feedback and engagement. We are just at the
    beginning stages of thinking about how this might go in practice,
    and I see it very much as a collaborative effort. Check out the
    Equality by Lot blog if you are interested!

    -   Thirdsyphon

        In real life, this would almost certainly end in disaster. ..
        but it's an intriguing thought experiment, so I'll play along.

        If you're worried about the issues of transparency and lobbyists
        exercising undue influence on the legislators, there's an easier
        way to deal with that than sequestering them away from the rest
        of society for three years. I think that's a bad idea on its
        merits in addition to being impractical.

        Instead, why not just keep their identities anonymous? The
        Supreme Court or some other trusted entity can hold the lottery
        drawing in secret and then, over the next week or two, ship each
        of the winners a laptop with military-grade encryption and a
        variation on the following letter:

        "Dear Mr. Smith:

        Congratulations. You have been randomly chosen to serve
        anonymously as a Member of the United States Special Legislature
        for Transportation during a term of three (3) years beginning at
        12:01am on January 1st of next year. In this role, you will use
        the Assigned Legislative Internet Anonymizing Signifier:
        "@US/Transportation-Rep.INDIGO." This ALIAS has been linked to
        the enclosed laptop, which you will use exclusively to carry out
        all legislative functions. All communications to and from your
        ALIAS, and all votes cast by it, will become a matter of public
        record; however, your true identity will not. Your compensation
        for this service, $750,000 per year, will be paid into your
        Numbered Legislative Account in biweekly intervals.

        Please note that while you are free, in your role as a
        Legislator, to reveal as much or as little of your personal
        background as you wish, and to tell any individuals you trust
        about your role, the risk of all such revelations is borne by
        you. If you are ever publicly identified as a Legislator, during
        or after your term of service, for any reason, you will be
        immediately dismissed from service; your ALIAS and the physical
        laptop associated with it will be disabled; and all payments to
        your NLA will cease. In addition, as a known former legislator
        your financial affairs will be subject to heightened scrutiny by
        law enforcement to ensure that you are not improperly receiving
        any favors or financial benefits from lobbyists or other parties
        affected by your votes.

        You have the right to decline this position. If you wish to
        exercise that option, simply activate your laptop, and select
        DECLINE at the first prompt that appears after your biometric
        verification has been completed. Thank you once again for
        serving your country, and good luck!"

        -   http://www.alexguerrero.org Alex Guerrero

            This is an interesting suggestion (not sure how seriously
            you meant it--always hard to tell when people are offering a
            reductio rather than a genuine suggestion), and total
            anonymity could be useful for some issues, perhaps. There
            are worries, however. For one thing, it would complicate
            group deliberation, although there are perhaps technological
            fixes for that. For another thing, there is a real question
            of how the rest of society will react to policy imposed by a
            lottery-selected body. One key to acceptance of that policy
            might be knowing something about the people who were making
            these decisions. (This seemed important in the case of the
            British Columbia Citizens' Assembly, for example.) There
            might be some capability for anonymity while revealing, say,
            demographic facts, occupational facts, residency facts,
            etc., but it's a worry about deep anonymity of this sort.
            There's also the possibility of
            anonymity/quarantine/insulation during the service, with
            identities revealed after completion. But I also think there
            are important values of transparency and public engagement
            during the decisionmaking that would be made difficult by
            this kind of secrecy. But it's an interesting idea, and
            highlights how technological advances might make certain
            possibilities viable...

            -   Thirdsyphon

                Thanks for your response. Even \*I'm\* not sure how
                seriously I meant that, but it's a fascinating exercise
                all the same, so I'm inclined to keep playing.

                The group deliberation template I had in mind was the
                live chat rooms they sometimes set up at The Economist
                to cover things like political debates and other
                scheduled news events. The staffers who participate in
                the chat are all anonymous and distinguishable only by
                the separate colors assigned to their posts (and they'll
                call each other by the name of that color, hence the
                "Rep.INDIGO" of my example). Although the participants
                all tend to have different personalities and
                perspectives, which become readily apparent as they
                interact with each other, you'd be amazed at how little
                difference it makes for the participants and the
                audience to not know who anyone "really" is. A similar
                phenomenon can be observed in discussion threads like
                this one, where a robust give-and-take of ideas can
                occur without the need for personal biography (although
                participants in threads can and often do productively
                reference their personal biography and experiences when
                it's pertinent).

                To my mind, by far the biggest legitimacy issue created
                by an anonymous, randomly chosen legislature is the
                problem of convincing the public that the random,
                anonymous legislature actually exists, and isn't just a
                Kafka-esque fiction presented by some shadowy cabal
                that's \*really\* in charge. In the States, the word of
                the U.S. Supreme Court might be enough to gain the
                public's trust; it's not clear to me who might fill that
                role in other systems of government, but then every
                society is unique.

                The other issues you mention (the risk of low
                demographic diversity, and the the probable lack -at
                least to start with- of technical competence and
                expertise among the legislators) are, to some extent,
                both problems that exist quite comfortably in our
                current system of government; and to the extent that
                random selection doesn't solve them, it strikes me as an
                inherent and unavoidable downside to this method of
                government.

                Sequestration, in my view, is more problematic than
                anonymity. Three years of what amounts to genteel
                imprisonment, even for $750,000 a year, would be a
                bitter pill for a lot of people to swallow. Most people
                with families would insist that their families be
                allowed to join them at their undisclosed location; and
                not every family will accept this deal on any terms at
                all. You could very easily end up with a biased sample
                of people; and the candidates who reject the deal
                (because they have families and social/emotional
                connections to other people that they can't just cut
                off) strike me as exactly the sort of people we'd
                \*want\* in this government.

                Sequestration with anonymity is basically accomplishing
                the same goal twice, at horrific inconvenience and
                expense; but sequestration \*without\* anonymity
                accomplishes nothing. For one thing, it precludes any
                interaction with constituents; but if it becomes known
                that "pro-energy" legislators are always rewarded with
                cushy jobs at energy companies when their term of
                service ends, then the energy lobbyists won't actually
                need to say anything to the legislators in order to sway
                them, and we'll have a system that operates much the
                same as it does now.

                Disclosing demographic data is a solid idea -especially
                if you have a real world example of it working in
                practice- but it's a slippery slope. Too much
                information about who these people are and where they
                come from could easily unmask them. . . remember, these
                are anonymous \*public figures\* we're talking about
                here, and the media will have the motive and resources
                to make the most out of every scrap of information that
                the public disclosure gives them as a jumping-off point
                to finding out who they are. Also, a random sample of
                just a few dozen people (my estimate of the likely
                "class" size for an Issue Legislature) is likely to be
                skewed in favor of \*something\* that makes it
                unrepresentative of some aspect of the electorate as a
                whole. Too many college grads. . . too many westerners.
                . . too many left-handed people. . . unless your sample
                gets into the thousands (which I think would be
                unaffordable), that problem won't vanish. So the
                legislators will lose at least some of the legitimacy
                gained by this disclosure to the questions that the
                disclosure itself opens them up to.

                And also (this just occurred to me), imagine a
                hypothetical scenario in which an anonymous legislator
                described as a "Southwestern rural, white, churchgoing
                male in his late 30s who works on an oil rig" starts
                voting and speaking like Elizabeth Warren and
                consequently becomes a target of nonstop vilification in
                the right-wing media (or, if you prefer, the reverse
                situation in a liberal demographic). Can you imagine the
                witch-hunting paranoia that would haunt all the people
                in that demographic? This might incline some people to
                toe the line of their demographic point of origin rather
                than their own judgment (which isn't \*all\* downside,
                especially for demographics with self-loathing issues,
                but still).

    -   Ahmed R Teleb

        Alex,\
         Excellent piece, well done! I've been looking out for your book
        on the subject, that I first heard about in your Boston Globe
        article. Any updates on the book?

        I also mentioned you in a piece called "The New French
        Revolution" on Truthout as an example of political thinkers
        going beyond representative government.

        -   http://www.alexguerrero.org Alex Guerrero

            Hi Ahmed,

            Thanks for your comment. The book is still in progress. I'll
            take a look at your piece; thanks for the heads up about it.
            Best wishes.

-   off\_leash

    During the early colonial days of Philadelphia, the mayoral
    candidate was essentially chosen by drawing straws. Whoever got the
    short one became mayor. No one wanted the job because it interfered
    with a person's ability to pursue commerce. People were much more
    interested in earning money than in wielding political power. In
    those days, holding public office truly was a public service.

-   Alice Xia

    A few concerns... First, the author claims that voters are not the
    main problem, but rather, it is mostly apathy from politicians and
    their unresponsiveness to the needs of citizens. But then, voters
    are criticized for being ignorant about what are representatives are
    doing? I understand that the relationship must go both ways in order
    to even come close to realizing the pillars of the representative
    democracy theory, but I think this article misses a big point that
    goes beyond which either side of the voting system is or isn't
    doing. Most Americans seem to overlook the fact that we have never
    adhered to the theoretical underpinnings of the Constitution, so
    when our democratic institutions are in in bad shape, why do we
    instinctively turn back to something that never even existed? This
    problem moves past the author's argument for a lottery system (which
    is pretty entertaining, and not even in a mocking sense); I'm just
    thinking about why there was a strong negative reverberation to
    Brand's comment in the media when it seems like the statistics prove
    that more and more Americans agree with him. Again, it's as if
    people are offended that Brand would attack an ideal that has yet to
    come into fruition.

    -   marxmarv

        Voting is merely a ceremony or sacrament of civil religion. When
        one goes to vote, one ratifies the institution of (ostensibly)
        representative democracy. That's where the power of not voting
        lies, and that's what scares those who benefit from power as it
        is currently constituted.

-   Agga

    I think this idea has promise, but doesn't go far enough. There is
    no reason the people who "win the lottery" wouldn't become nearly as
    corrupt as modern day politicians.

    Instead, do away with the whole idea of serving terms. Draw or
    randomly select (to get a thoroughly representative sample of the
    population as in scientific studies) a number of people to form
    citizens advisory councils who then convene on an issue. They spend
    a few intensive weeks pondering and debating the issue and get to
    hear experts and advocates. Then they make a report with proposed
    solutions, and a body of implementors get to work.

    Tom Atlee, amongst others, are championing these types of councils.
    The idea is that several people with a great diversity of thought
    will come up with better solutions as they are likely to consider
    more conditions and from more angles.

    Government could be a series of councils on an international,
    national, regional, and local level.

-   dfla

    It is a proven fact that any diverse group makes better decisions
    than an expert or group of experts. Lottery schemes usually devolve
    into focus groups or qualification bigotry. A lottery needs to be
    inclusive and blind. Along with a lottery or even the current
    election process when picked an internship with the current
    "elected" official would be helpful.

-   Brandon McNaughton

    Interesting idea. This would also take care of the "career
    politician" class. But what about scale? 300 people per issue
    legislature would be alright at the federal level; but a bit much
    for anything smaller than NYC or Tokyo. I'd be interested to see
    this tried at a state level.

    Another question is; under this system, do you stick with a single
    executive chosen by election? Move to a randomly chosen executive?
    Or do you pull an "executive council" together by pulling one person
    from each single issue legislature?

-   David Moye

    As nice as the idea sounds, electing congress by lottery puts even
    more power in the hands of lobbyists and other Washington insiders
    who will need to show the newly elected people how things are done.

-   Renee

    There is no system that will abrogate human nature. A lottocracy?
    That will be power to the bureaucracy, because every term you'll
    have a large crowd of newbies who don't know what they're doing.
    They'll have to rely on the lobbyists and staff who remain after the
    perpetual freshmen go. The ones who distinguish themselves as public
    servants? Never mind that. Throw them out with the rest.

    You think that is somehow better than an informed electorate voting?
    I'm sorry but I don't really see it that way. I don't want a new
    captain of the ship ever two weeks just because I don't trust anyone
    on the planet. That means a ship zig zagging all over the place.

    I'd rather be able to choose the guy I think brings the best skill
    set and mindset to the table, and if someone distinguishes
    themselves, then I want to keep them in office. That's my right and
    my privilege to vote my conscience.

    As for those who believe voting doesn't matter, please continue to
    think so. The fewer of you who vote, the more my vote begins to
    count. :P

    -   marxmarv

        Does it? In what other department of life does an employee have
        more right to wreck the factory, harass other employees, ignore
        management, and heaven help you if you lay a finger on them,
        until they punch out at the end of their scheduled shift? Why do
        you need authority so badly?

        -   Renee

            I'm not sure I really understand your comment, marxmarv. I
            said nothing about wrecking factories. I said I'd like to be
            able to choose the person I think best rather than leaving
            it to a roll of the dice.

-   marxmarv

    People vote as an act of religious observance. That the religion in
    question is a civil religion does not necessarily weaken its hold.

    First, it assumes that people generally believe in the concept of
    fiduciary duty. Society's tacit approval of stealing office supplies
    from employers gives the lie to that. Second, it assumes that people
    generally \*seek\* to be open-minded and discerning, to which I
    offer both Edward Bernays and his ideological descendants, and Kevin
    Drum's recent article on the abortion divide being driven by elites,
    not proles. Third, it assumes that the original justifications for
    the system (lack of distributed time and expertise) still hold. In
    response, I suggest that the era of near-light-speed communications
    and near-instantaneous retrieval of information or knowledge has
    blunted any question of expertise, and the matter of lack of time is
    simply Parkinson's Law combined with the Protestant work ethic.

    Furthermore, social and partisan identity are a far more accurate
    predictor of an official's official activities than any ostensible
    domain expertise (except, apparently, how to run a state like a
    factory and dormitory), and as long as political partisanship is
    still a fashionable piece of one's social identity ensemble,
    political parties will still be crafting the ideologies that its
    faithful would follow. In the extreme, any person or group who can
    afford to hire a battalion of sex workers or provide other unique
    and/or forbidden experiences could easily "get to yes" on any
    committee they like, and humans are expert at rationalizing such
    perfectly rational behavior -- in fact, it is ALWAYS potentially
    rational to sell out, according to some or other conceivable set of
    preferences. Finally, nothing about sortition remedies the lack of
    accountability inherent in the de facto privilege-cum-right to serve
    out one's term. Without the ability to instantaneously and by
    popular will remove malfeasors, including also those that try to use
    their official capacity to secure protection from accountability,
    there is no accountability.

    Besides all that, does a paternalistic, martial, hero-worshipping
    religious sensibility like American Exceptionalism even desire, or
    can it even accept, participatory government? I've seen very few
    signs in the mainstream of those who do not wish to be subjects of
    authority. They usually just want a different autocrat, preferably
    themselves. Those who can manage even such simple mental tools as
    Hegelian synthesis without prompting are rarer still. Such societies
    cannot function without scapegoats to milk and moral panics to keep
    them down, and save for a few years here and there, from the first
    days of slavery to the last gasps of the temperance movement, the
    USA has maintained a nearly unbroken run of having some outgroup on
    which to blame their poor outcomes.

    So don't flatter yourself overmuch -- the whole prospect of
    reinventing political economy without first reinventing
    politico-economic sensibilities (or culture itself) is not
    utopianistic, just onanistic.

-   founders1

    Check out this idea, to bring the public voice to bear in a whole
    new way, that is both powerful and scalable.
    [http://www.VOP.org](http://www.VOP.org). Also, new study being
    released this week by PPC showing how using online 'policymaking
    simulations' Americans can solve even tough problems like Social
    Security. Here is the link to register:
    [http://www.public-consultation.org/email/SS\_Event020714.html](http://www.public-consultation.org/email/SS_Event020714.html)

-   Virtually Yours

    This was a superb essay...congrats! I have been fascinated by this
    idea of sortition ever since I first stumbled upon a reference to it
    in Arthur C. Clarke's novel, Imperial Earth. I love your idea for
    the lottocracy (!) and the biggest question in my mind is: how could
    we potentially go about implementing a system such as this? I have
    an idea and would be curious to see if you have any thoughts...

    There are plenty of people on both sides of the political spectrum
    who are thoroughly discouraged and disillusioned...so what if we
    were to set up a third party, based upon a set number of shared
    goals and values (perhaps something akin to Living Room
    Conversations and/or the issues that were raised by Occupy the
    Debates) which could then be turned into the party’s platform?
    Instead of voting for a candidate, you would in fact be voting for
    the agreed-upon party platform and when the party wins, qualified
    individuals could then be selected by lottery for temporary roles of
    oversight and management in order to guarantee the successful
    implementation of the platform...all of those shared goals and
    values which brought everyone together in the first place! If
    something like this could be accomplished, it would prove that such
    a system could work and the precedent would be undeniable...

    And what about this for added incentive: let's say you are selected
    for a three-year term but you manage to successfully
    accomplish/implement your particular goal before that time is
    up...congrats! You can choose to step down and hand over the reigns
    to someone else (who will then be selected through another round of
    sortition) or you can continue on till the end of your term.

    I also wonder if those who are selected would be willing to wear
    Google Glass (or some other similar form of monitoring/live
    streaming tech) for the duration of their term? Anyone who agrees to
    accept a position with that much responsibility should be humble
    enough to acknowledge the necessity of transparency, a concept which
    is all but novel in the world of politics.

    Thanks again so much for sharing this fantastic piece :-)

-   scribblerlarry

    This is a good enough 'bare bones' outline of this concept. Let me
    offer some thoughts on this, if I may. On implementation; It is not
    necessary to tear down the old system so as to initiate the new. Our
    civilization has advanced to the point where we can use evolution to
    achieve our goals in much the same way as we have, in the past, used
    revolution. But understand this: Using evolution is NOT a quick
    method. It is cleaner in that far fewer people die. It is better in
    that the infrastructure of a highly technological society will be
    little harmed - important to we who can no longer survive in an
    agrarian society.

    The trick is to not confront those who espouse the present system.
    It is to ignore it to some degree - an ever increasing degree - as
    we build our own system right beside it. There is no way that we can
    simply alter our electoral system. We'll need to alter our economic
    system and our social system as well.

    First we need to understand that those two systems need to be looked
    at as inherently separate systems. Yes, they influence each other
    and need to work together for the good of the whole, but they ARE
    separate systems.

    In our present situation we have let the economic system come to
    dominate and control the social system. This is upside down. Men
    join together in societies for social reasons and find that they
    must have an economic system in order to expedite achieving social
    goals. We DO NOT build a social system so as to feed the needs of an
    economic system; so as to make of ourselves wage slaves.

    Unfortunately, that's just exactly what we've done. This means that
    our management team will be / is being chosen by whatever means is
    deemed best by the economic system instead of by the social system.

    Needless to say, the present economic system is quite happy with the
    present state of affairs; it can control whom we elect so as to
    ensure that only those sympathetic to its aims sit in the seats of
    management in the society. A lottery system would change that
    drastically.

    If the lottery system is set up so that there is a one-year overlap
    to allow the new person to be trained by the previous person as well
    as dividing the civic service/social management into twelve (or more
    or less) segments which each have their own time slot for
    changeover. The new person should spend hid first year sitting at
    the side of the old person to learn. He will spend the last year
    teaching his successor too.

    I do not recommend that those selected be paid anything special.
    Whatever the average income is in the nation (or state or
    municipality or county or.....) that is his salary. The only 'perq'
    he should get is to pay no taxes on that salary.

    There's a start. There's a lot more to think of. I've been working
    on this since 1970....... ;-)\
     .

-   Ben

    It's a very interesting proposal.

    My biggest question would be how to allot the funding to each of the
    legislatures. Who would decide how much money each legislature would
    have to deal with to enact legslation? Or how to tax the people in
    order to get the funds? How would people decide what gets funding or
    not if there are 30 different legislatures all begging for funding
    for their ideas at once. Without funding a law doesn't have any
    effect no matter how good great a law or how little corruption there
    is. Unfortunately the people that have the money or control funding
    is where the power would lie in a lottocracy not with the
    legislatures.

-   Newsance

    Bravo.

-   Malc

    Maybe it would be better to have legislation that prevents
    corporates from the prospect of infinite longevity. If they too
    faced inevitable death then the nature of their lobbying might
    change. In this unique case short term ism might be good!

-   One who do not thinks

    I had the same thing in mind only I went some steps further for the
    creation of the informational wing of the randomly selected
    representives.

    Lists with specialists in every field of activity, with proven
    credentials would constitute the source of the random informational
    groups that would be attached to the random selected
    representatives.

    The lists would be regional to better follow-up and stay up to date
    with any change but such a commission of specialists could be formed
    from all the regions.

    The only way possible to stop corruption is to make it too difficult
    to buy everyone off. The remuneration should be incredibly high,
    offering maybe a completely decent life after the end of the term.

    But remuneration is not the only aspect, we have to introduce the
    next level of liability. Political liability which would be higher
    that the penal one.

    There is so much, so much to say on this topic that we would be
    talking for weeks and of this I am sure.

    The point of it all that the only way to stop corruption is to make
    it so random (a true randomness) that it becomes too difficult to
    control the process from a corruption perspective.

    You also need to check both the activities of the representatives
    and the informational commissions by creating analysis commissions
    of both specialists and random individuals that would go over all
    the aforementioned activities.

    Also, you need to have random periods of selection for all the
    candidates.

    Let's say that legal representatives would be chosen for between X
    and Y years.

    Let's say the informational commissions would be chosen for between
    a formula based on X and Y, but the duration should be much smaller.

    Let's say the analysis commissions would be chosen for between a
    formula based on the previous formula based on X and Y.

    Baaaah... So much to say.

[![A child waits for her mother at a polling station in Rome, 24
February, 2013. Photo by Yara
Nardi/Reuters](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/04/Child-elections-italy-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/henry-farrell-post-democracy/)

There is no alternative

Governments now answer to business, not voters. Mainstream parties grow
ever harder to distinguish. Is democracy dead?

By Henry Farrell 3,300 words

[![The open source method ‘seemed to resemble a great babbling bazaar of
differing agendas and approaches'. Photo by Spencer
Platt/Getty](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/01/Bazaar-dhaka-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/world-views/nathaniel-tkacz-open-source-government/)

Open sesame

‘Openness’ is the new magic word in politics – but should governments
really be run like Wikipedia?

By Nathaniel Tkacz 2,100 words

[![Villagers stand on top of a crashed rocket in the Altai territory,
where fuel is a major pollutant. Photo by Jonas
Bendiksen/Magnum](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/10/Fuller-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/right-and-left-are-fading-the-future-is-black-and-green/)

Ninety-degree revolution

Right and Left are fading away. The real question in politics will be:
do you look to the earth or aspire to the skies?

By Steve Fuller 2,100 words

![Jans-Mom\_FINAL](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Jans-Mom_FINAL1.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/world-views/jans-mom-a-short-film-about-a-boy-with-a-mother-in-prison/)

Jan’s Mom
=========

With his mother in prison, 11-year-old Jan works up the courage to discuss her feelings – and his own
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anneloor van Heemstra

16 minutes

![Back-to-Land\_USE](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Back-to-Land_USE.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/world-views/back-land-a-short-film-about-a-beached-blue-whale/)

Back to Land
============

The beached carcass of a blue whale – the planet’s largest animal – is a terrible, wondrous sight
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tijana Petrović

4 minutes

More films

[](#)

### Like us on Facebook

[](https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=aeonmag)

### Follow us on Twitter

[](#email-signup)

### Sign up to our newsletter

[Newsletter](#email-signup)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Share

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine/ "Aeon Magazine")

-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about/ "About Aeon")
-   [Our writers](http://aeon.co/magazine/contributors/ "Our writers")
-   [Most popular](http://aeon.co/magazine/most-popular/ "Most Popular")
-   [Aeon Film](http://aeon.co/film "Aeon Film")

© Aeon Media Ltd. 2014 Designed by
[magCulture](http://magculture.com/projects/ "magCulture")
[Privacy](http://aeon.co/magazine/privacy-policy/ "Privacy policy")

Sign up for our Daily or Weekly newsletter

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/forget-elections-lets-pick-reps-by-lottery/
