[![I <3 Steve
McConnell](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/images/coding-horror-official-logo-small.png)](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/)

[![Coding
Horror](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/images/coding-horror-text.png)](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/)\
 programming and human factors\
by Jeff Atwood

[How To Become a Better Programmer by Not Programming](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/01/how-to-become-a-better-programmer-by-not-programming.html)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### January 29, 2007

Last year in [Programmers as Human
Beings](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000541.html), I
mentioned that I was reading [Programmers At
Work](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1556152116/codihorr-20).
It's a great collection of interviews with famous programmers circa
1986. All the interviews are worth reading, but the interview with Bill
Gates has one particular answer that cuts to the bone:

> *Does accumulating experience through the years necessarily make
> programming easier?*
>
> Bill Gates: No. **I think after the first three or four years, it's
> pretty cast in concrete whether you're a good programmer or not.**
> After a few more years, you may know more about managing large
> projects and personalities, but after three or four years, it's clear
> what you're going to be. There's no one at Microsoft who was just kind
> of mediocre for a couple of years, and then just out of the blue
> started optimizing everything in sight. I can talk to somebody about a
> program that he's written and know right away whether he's really a
> good programmer.

We already know [there's a vast divide between those who can program and
those who
cannot](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000635.html).

But the dirty little secret of the software development industry is that
this is also true *even for people who can program*: [there's a vast
divide between good developers and mediocre
developers](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000072.html). A
mediocre developer can program his or her heart out for four years, but
that won't magically transform them into a good developer. And the good
developers always seem to have a natural knack for the stuff from the
very beginning.

I agree with Bill. From what I've seen, there's just no crossing the
skill chasm as a software developer. You've either got it, or you don't.
No amount of putting your nose to the grindstone will change that. But
if you accept that premise, it also presents us with a paradox: if
experience doesn't make you a better programmer, what does? Are our
skill levels written in stone? Is it *impossible* to become a better
programmer?

To answer that question, you have to consider the obsessive nature of
programming itself. Good developers are good at programming. Really good
at programming. You might even say fanatically good. If they're anything
like me, they've spent nearly every waking moment in front of a computer
for most of their lives. And naturally, they get better at it over time.
Competent software developers have already mastered the skill of
programming, which puts them in a very select club. But if you're
already in the 97th percentile for programming aptitude, what difference
does a few more percentile points really make in the big scheme of
things?

The older I get, the more I believe that **the only way to become a
better programmer is by *not programming***. You have to come up for
air, put down the compiler for a moment, and take stock of what you're
really doing. Code is important, but it's [a small part of the overall
process](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000710.html).

This [piece in Design
Observer](http://www.designobserver.com/archives/011848.html) offers a
nice bit of related advice:

> Over the years, I came to realize that my best work has always
> involved subjects that interested me, or -- even better -- subjects
> about which I've become interested, and even passionate about, through
> the very process of doing design work. I believe I'm still passionate
> about graphic design. But the great thing about graphic design is that
> it is almost always about something else. Corporate law. Professional
> football. Art. Politics. Robert Wilson. And if I can't get excited
> about whatever that something else is, I really have trouble doing a
> good work as a designer. To me, the conclusion is inexcapable: the
> more things you're interested in, the better your work will be.

Passion for coding is a wonderful thing. But it's all too easy to
mindlessly, reflexively entrench yourself deeper and deeper into a skill
that you've already proven yourself more than capable at many times
over. To truly become a better programmer, you have to to **cultivate
passion for everything else that goes on *around* the programming.**

Bill Gates, in a 2005 interview, [follows up in spirit to his 1986
remarks](http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/exec/billg/speeches/2005/07-18FacultySummit.aspx):

> The nature of these jobs is not just closing your door and doing
> coding, and it's easy to get that fact out. The greatest missing skill
> is somebody who's both good at understanding the engineering and who
> has good relationships with the hard-core engineers, and bridges that
> to working with the customers and the marketing and things like that.
> And so that sort of engineering management career track, even amongst
> all the people we have, we still fall short of finding people who want
> to do that, and so we often have to push people into it.
>
> I'd love to have people who come to these jobs wanting to think of it
> as an exercise in people management and people dynamics, as well as
> the basic engineering skills. That would be absolutely amazing.
>
> And we can promise those people within two years of starting that
> career most of what they're doing won't be coding, because there are
> many career paths, say, within that Microsoft Office group where
> you're part of creating this amazing product, you get to see how
> people use it, you get to then spend two years, build another version,
> and really change the productivity in this very deep way, take some
> big bets on what you're doing and do some things that are just
> responsive to what that customer wants.

You won't-- you *cannot*-- become a better programmer through sheer
force of programming alone. You can only complement and enhance your
existing programming skills by branching out. Learn about your users.
Learn about the industry. Learn about your business.

The more things you are interested in, the better your work will be.

Posted by Jeff Atwood

[« Extending The Windows Vista Grace Period to 120
Days](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/01/extending-the-windows-vista-grace-period-to-120-days.html)

[Stylesheets for Print and Handheld
»](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/01/stylesheets-for-print-and-handheld.html)

119 Comments

Will not running make you a better runner? Will not playing tennis make
you a better tennis player?

I think the physical analogies break down. Programming is a purely
mental activity. And as I've cited multiple times in the original post
and in the comments, the distribution of skill in programming is
extremely lopsided relative to other professions. There's no normal
curve: it's a double hump of those who can, and those who can't.

So if you can do it \*at all\*, you can always do it. Your programming
skills won't deteriorate to the point that you can't program. You won't
slide back over from a Sheep to a Goat. It's impossible.

Will not thinking make you a better thinker?

Sometimes not thinking can, in fact, make you a better thinker. You
don't stop thinking entirely. You stop thinking about the same topics
and instead think about related (or completely unrelated) topics that
can lead to breakthroughs in other areas. Richard Feynman didn't spend
all his time thinking about physics:

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surely\_You're\_Joking,\_Mr.\_Feynman!](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surely_You're_Joking,_Mr._Feynman!)

Jeff Atwood on January 30, 2007 1:10 AM

Interesting post, but utter BS. :)

You can be anything you want to be. Whatever you set out to achieve you
can do if you really decide to and really work at it. You've heard this
pep talk before, I know, but it happens to be true.

The guys who try to tell you that you can't cut it simply have their own
ax to grind. Either they tried and failed, or they have some vested
interest in your failure. Don't believe any of it.

andy on January 30, 2007 1:29 AM

Thinking is for fratboys

retardonerd on January 30, 2007 1:44 AM

Typical boooschwaa sensibility crap. Bill "I got rich cuz mommy had a
hook up" Gates is a great swindler. Anyone who tries to justify thier
greatness by saying you have to not do something to be good at it is
trying to justify their own fear being looked at for what they really
are.

Attitudes like the ones portrayed by these "lifestyle" programmers have
no clue what it really takes because they have been getting others to
code for them since they got thier cushy new office with thier
ultra-geek pong clocks...

Excuse me while I barf all over my keyboarasdfa;lkj;alkdja;sldadj

retardonerd on January 30, 2007 1:53 AM

Anyone can be a good programmer. The difference is that most people are
not driven to become good at anything. They reach a point that is
comfortable for them and stop improving. You see this in all aspects of
life.

I completely disagree that a good programmer is apparent or not within a
few years. What you might discover is if someone cares enough to improve
themselves.

It has often been said that it takes 10 years to develop a mastery of
any skill. In my experience this is a reasonable statement. It's just a
pity that in software development 10 years is just about a programmers
expiry date.\

Whoop on January 30, 2007 2:27 AM

mixing up a lot of notions here:

- that Gates is qualified to judge. may be not. IIRC, he's never
provided evidence that he ever wrote anything other than a BASIC
interpreter (and legend has it that Allen was the primary author). is
there any? being a critic of X doesn't entail being good at X; usually,
but not systems development. the quality of criticism here derives not
from subjective preference (this picture pleases me more than that
picture), but acknowledged superiority (i built a better mousetrap, and
yours is crap because it doesn't trap mouses). which brings us to...

- that M$ is a demonstrable example of innovation, superior systems
development, or creativity. if you go down the list; it was something
they stole (DOS), something they built for hire then stole (Windows UI),
something they built for hire then ported (Office), something they EEE
(IE), something they lucked out on (DOS for IBM, who were clueless; and
Lotus 1-2-3 which was made ONLY for DOS and thus made DOS mandatory),
something they did that was illegal but didn't get really punished for
(the anti-trust stuff, and the continuing punitive contracts with OEMs;
do you really think Dell, et al wouldn't offer Linux if they could
without penalty?). face it: M$ got where they are not by building better
mousetraps, but by trapping folks into buying only M$ mousetraps.

- folks are confounding understanding syntax (can you write tight code
in X language?) with semantics (do you understand O/S prinicples or
database principles or Knuth's books?). the notion that what you know
how to do changes in 4 years is the syntax trap. being able to absorb
new syntax/languages in short order is a demonstrable skill. not the
same as being a brilliant developer.

- that coders are the same as developers. developers are different from
each other (coders, too). having a deep understanding of the logic and
structure of an O/S is different from (and have less $$$$ value), than
deep understanding of how to build a databased G/L. in fact, i'd bet on
it.

- DaVinci wasn't born doing that stuff; he learned his trade first. the
aura of creativity is self-aggrandizement. even Picasso had different
periods and made different stuff.

Buggy Fun Bunny on January 30, 2007 2:33 AM

true!

Juha on January 30, 2007 2:39 AM

- "Programming is closer to art than any other engineering profession"\
 - "Your ability to think creatively is proportional to your programming
talent."\
 - "I think great programming requires not only intelligence but also
creativity. The best programmers I know are artists not engineers!"

Above posters would be interested in
[http://www.amazon.com/Software-Creativity-2-0-Robert-Glass/dp/0977213315/sr=1-1/qid=1170197290/ref=pd\_bbs\_sr\_1/002-0838152-3645618?ie=UTF8s=books](http://www.amazon.com/Software-Creativity-2-0-Robert-Glass/dp/0977213315/sr=1-1/qid=1170197290/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1/002-0838152-3645618?ie=UTF8s=books)

- "Finding new minimal ways to represent patterns and mechanisms to
verify the correctness of those patterns is more important to me than
how it can be used in real life."\
 - "People with an CS background too often seem to get frustrated (or
even angry) when their elegant solutions can't handle the real world"

Interesting that both ends of the spectrum read this blog. BTW, the
first post relates much to the previous blog entry about how much code
you've written that's actually in use. I assume the poster is an
academe.\

Brad on January 30, 2007 2:51 AM

!false

Great post.

Maybe you could write some about how you organize your day? Because I
want to learn how I get time to "not programming"? :)

Peter Palludan on January 30, 2007 2:57 AM

i'm 30, and went back to school after having a diploma (gifted, etc. -
just lazy as a 10 year cat) and have learned that practice does indeed
make better... I used to have the worst code ever, but was the most
computer-literate person otherwise. Stuff I'd do would include extensive
hard-code, redundant vars and such, and some of the worst logic ever
(after I re-read it a week later). Now after a few failed jobs and such,
I've realized how much code I did know and have now 'grown' a sense
programming that I didn't know I didn't have.

I see the same problems that used to take me twenty lines of code i now
do in five. So, I disagree... Spending time with the code does help -
but the article is true about one thing... If a person is not
comfortable with abstracts and meaninglessness, the concept of code
would be lost.

ceelow on January 30, 2007 2:59 AM

i think that we should have a definition of what a 'good developer' is.
let's assume that a 'good developer' is someone who develops code that
doesn't hog the system's resources and who uses the minimum number of
lines of code and in minimum time.\
 i firmly believe that having a good design phase can greatly improve
your coding.once you have your plan,you can start programming instead of
constantly going back and forth between designing and programming.a good
programmer knows how to translate an idea into effective code and having
a good design phase will save you a lot of time and allow you to
concentrate on other aspects of the project.

so i totally agree with the article that you can become a better
programmer by not programming.by becoming better at designing, you can
become a better programmer.

ajmal on January 30, 2007 3:31 AM

Very true indeed. I did not recognize the "do not program" fact this way
of my own, but I recently wrote something similar categorizing
"Different types of programmers"
([http://goit-postal.blogspot.com/2006/10/different-types-of-programmers.html)](http://goit-postal.blogspot.com/2006/10/different-types-of-programmers.html))
even without having that in mind: "The Generalist" is pretty the kind of
guy who does not program while programming.

Thumbs up! Georgi

Georgi on January 30, 2007 3:35 AM

Isn't everything in this post related to basically any creative field?
If you'd replaced the programming references by music, art, literary, or
performance references, you'd have the same point and there'd be nothing
fresh about it. (Except that making an emotional connection to your
audience is perhaps done in a completely different way.)

Foxyshadis on January 30, 2007 3:37 AM

So I'm never going to be a good programmer then.

engtech on January 30, 2007 4:05 AM

I think the physical analogies break down. \
 Programming is a purely mental activity.

As is Chess, which was featured prominently in the article I referenced.
Chessmasters are made, not born. Why not good programmers?\

Haacked on January 30, 2007 4:36 AM

Expanding your horizons is also a key. Being personally supposed to
teach software engineering this year, I have been having the same kind
of concerns. See "The unteachable parts of software engineering",
[http://blog.vermorel.com/?p=28](http://blog.vermorel.com/?p=28)

Also, being "good" involves many aspects. For example: is-it wise to
implement (even if the execution is perfect) a product that either
already exists or that does not reflect any business needs?

Joannes Vermorel on January 30, 2007 4:41 AM

I disagree that you can't get better. While certainly like anything else
there are those that are gurus or prodigies at it. But every programmer
learns better way of doing things as time goes on. Whether it is coding
something by hand and then moving to wiring in a COTS to save resources
or programming with Web Services for the first time as opposed to limit
oneselves to a Windows Form. Some things cannot be learned overnight. 4
years is a long time. Nothing looks the same as it did 4 years ago. So I
think it all can be boiled down to how readily a programmer adapts to
new technology instead of for example still doing VB6 for everything in
2007.

I often find this blog overgeneralizes. The trend you speak of is
inherent in anything. Not just programming.

Josh on January 30, 2007 4:48 AM

Chessmasters are made, not born. Why not good programmers?

I'll answer your question with another question. If chess is analogous
to programming, why can't computers write code as well as they play
chess?

Human grandmasters are barely holding their own against chess programs
these days. And depending on who you ask, human chess players have
already lost the war.

[http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000701.html](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000701.html)

The answer, of course, is that programming has an infinity of choices
compared to chess. As others have commented, it's so open ended that
it's more analogous to art, or writing, or other purely creative
activities.

Also, just to clarify, I never said that you can't improve as a
programmer. Sure you can. But 90% of the improvements will be realized
in the first four years of your professional career, and the rest will
be incremental.

Jeff Atwood on January 30, 2007 4:49 AM

I feel that this posting does hold some weight though because a persons
IQ is said never to change. There's always some programmers code snippet
that you find around the web that is just so clever it sometimes
depresses me to think 'oh, i would've never thought of that!'.

does reading, absorbing then implementing tons of good code, and adding
you're own little twist make you a good coder?, i don't think so. So
maybe those really good programmers are just the ones that make the
breaththroughs.. like david heinemeier hansson with rails for example..
and i'm just the average guy who is just good enough to use it.

oh, and about the idea that not coding can make you better only makes
sense if the reason why you've stopped is because you became over
critical of yourself (i've done it). When you come back without all the
negativity and a clear head.. you're automatically better.

.. if i've repeated something, sorry, i didn't have the time to read all
the comments.

crappy\_coder :) on January 30, 2007 4:57 AM

I think this post points in the wrong direction.\
 Programming, the art of abstraction, logic, reduction, and rewriting is
independent of 'the real world'. A great programmer can look at a
program and see it's beauty irrespective of it's real world
significance. Finding new minimal ways to represent patterns and
mechanisms to verify the correctness of those patterns is more important
to me than how it can be used in real life.\
 I agree with the need to raise your head, but for a different reason.
Other great programmers are exploring important ideas regarding syntax
and semantics that can drastically improve your expressivity,
correctness, and productivity. A significant amount of any programmer's
time is well spent measuring him/herself and his/her productivity, and
looking for ways to optimize that. The payback of exploring different
architectures, computing paradigms, languages, and algorithms is
enormous.\
 Ben\

Ben on January 30, 2007 4:59 AM

Jeff, nice post about needing some breadth to go with your programming
depth. But, I was a littel disappointed with the content vs the title:
I'd hoped that you'd be writing about the programmer's failure mode of
approaching every problem with the solution "write more code" already in
mind.

Really great programmers go to the heart of the problem, find what
aspect of it adds most value to the user then write a very small amount
of code to address that, and that alone. Programmers have a tendency to
think that the thing that they do that adds value (and justifies their
paycheck) above all else is write more code. And so they write code.
What they don't take into account is that code is a liability for the
customer, not an asset, so the less of it they produce (while adding
value through solving the problem), the better.

Best of all, delete some. The very best programmers can take a new
problem, find the essence of it, find the commonality with the essence
of the problems already solved, incorporate the new solution and end up
with less code than they started with.
[http://www.folklore.org/StoryView.py?story=Negative\_2000\_Lines\_Of\_Code.txt](http://www.folklore.org/StoryView.py?story=Negative_2000_Lines_Of_Code.txt)
for example

Ivan Moore will even tell you that deleting code is a refactoring
[http://ivan.truemesh.com/archives/000393.html](http://ivan.truemesh.com/archives/000393.html)
In fact, he sometimes says that even if that isn't your goal a good
non-delete refactoring should allow you to delete some code, or else you
are just pushing code around for the sake of it.

keithb on January 30, 2007 5:11 AM

"But if you accept that premise, it also presents us with a paradox: if
experience doesn't make you a better programmer, what does? Are our
skill levels written in stone? Is it impossible to become a better
programmer?"

Um, that's not what Bill said. He said you'll know within a couple years
what type of programmer you are, not that experience can't make you a
better programmer.

Dave on January 30, 2007 5:32 AM

Really good programmers spend a lot of time THINKING.\
 Not madly typing in code. Typing should be the last\
 act, not the first.

Rob on January 30, 2007 5:42 AM

This reminds me of the old and so true quote from Larry Wall

"The three chief virtues of a programmer are: Laziness, Impatience and
Hubris"

Where I think that order also is important...

Edward on January 30, 2007 5:52 AM

Your ability to think creatively is proportional to your programming
talent. Great problem solvers make great programmers.

farmsworth on January 30, 2007 5:59 AM

Some of the best code I've ever written was actually done on a legal pad
with a pen. I've written code across the spectrum, from memory
management on early Linux kernels up to massively parallel
supercomputers over satellites. Code that I look back at and say "Damn!
That was good." I did when I back away from the computer, say down with
pen and paper, and write the algorithm/design out. Sometimes it was
before coding and sometimes in the middle of slogging through digital
sewage.

My point is that good code is developed in your head, not your compiler.
You don't need a computer immediately to write good code.\

JimmyZ on January 30, 2007 6:04 AM

Here you go again, Jeff, beating that poor dead horse again. We've
already familiar with your opinion on this. But I would like to ask you
a few things. Will not running make you a better runner? Will not
playing tennis make you a better tennis player? Will not thinking make
you a better thinker? You're preaching this approach because you, in the
natural progression of your career, are programming less and managing
more. I mean, come on, if you have this much time to blog then you're
not pumping out a thousand lines a day.

You see, you are trying to convince yourself as much as you are trying
to convince us that programming less is the way to go. It's ok, I'm not
faulting you for that. We all evolve in our careers (we have no choice,
eh?) It's just that I don't think you're main argument is valid. You
might become a better manager, a better architect, etc. by programming
less, but you won't become a better programmer that way.

Ken on January 30, 2007 6:20 AM

@ken

I think you're completely missing the point.

Programming more will give you a better understanding of syntax, control
structures and other techincal elements of programming, but there is
more to being a good programmer than just writing code.

An example of the difference is the word verification on this page. A
bad programmer who knows lots of syntax would probably write a bulky
code base that randomly generates and scrambles a series of random
characters. However, that's like hammering a finishing nail with a
sledgehammer. The simple phrase 'ORANGE' is probably just as effective
at blocking comment spam as some over complicated captcha system, but it
required far less code and is much easier for users to deal with.

The point is that there are 2 ways to solve most programming problems.
Either keeping writing code until it works or take time to address the
goals and develop a concise elegant solution. Anybody can memorize
syntax, it takes a good programmer/developer to really understand the
bigger picture.

Ian Muir on January 30, 2007 6:42 AM

You may want to read Steve Yegge's counterpoint to this post:\

[http://steve.yegge.googlepages.com/practicing-programming](http://steve.yegge.googlepages.com/practicing-programming)

How do you know you are even a 'good' programmer?

Pedro on January 30, 2007 6:56 AM

If I thought 4 years ago "This is the best I'll ever be." then I would
probably be a worse programmer today. Well-roundedness is an issue and
being a good programmer is about solving the right problems.

Perhaps Bill meant your personality as a programmer is set in stone, but
you'd never convince me that I haven't been increasing my skills and
knowledge.

To be fair, I still approach problems the same way. I also still like
writing good clean code and I still like to read books on all sorts of
topics (dev and otherwise).

I would however hope the code I write now isn't as bad as what I wrote
back then.

MintyFreshness on January 30, 2007 6:58 AM

Couldn't agree with you more Jeff, programmers must keep their head
above the water for other things beside coding. Computer programs will
be useless without any users using it right? It's just like your
previous post, coding is fun, but shipping is the real job.

Hendra Saputra on January 30, 2007 7:07 AM

Good stuff. However, the term 'programming' perhaps needs to be better
defined: Optimizing a routine (pointlessly) so it is impossible for
someone else to read but is 1% faster? Writing code that can easily be
extended and modified? Building an app that can (relatively) easily be
changed due to the whims of the customer? Seeing the big design picture
and organizing the development strategy?

Another curious thought is why are some people really, really productive
in one language but not in another? Why does a certain language 'get in
the way' of a person's mind as they try to turn a problem into a
solution?

\

Steve on January 30, 2007 7:10 AM

I read both articles (which includes the one in the comments above).
They both approach programming from two different perspectives. Yes, you
have to practice and study to become a better programmer. You also have
to get away from it from time to time to gain the perspective of those
who are going to use, sell, or market the code you're working with.

The way I see it, the articles are not opposing each other but
complementing each other.

RT Cunningham on January 30, 2007 7:10 AM

I agree to a point. I would strongly argue against the notion that we
can't get any better ever. I've been coding professionally for about 7
years now and I think I'm MUCH better now than I was even 2 or 3 years
ago.

That said, I do think that there are some people who hit that wall and
can't proceed any further. People for whom this article is more true.
I've seen it in school, in my work, etc.

So I think you can't generalize this to all programmers. I continually
study and read to improve my skills. Not all my studying is on actual
coding but a good portion of it is. And I feel like I've gained more
skill in the past 2-3 years than I did in the 4-5 years before that.

Jeremy on January 30, 2007 7:20 AM

Kathy Sierra's "How to be an expert" essay

[http://headrush.typepad.com/creating\_passionate\_users/2006/03/how\_to\_be\_an\_ex.html](http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2006/03/how_to_be_an_ex.html)

takes the opposite point of view to your suggestion that "A mediocre
developer can program his or her heart out for four years, but that
won't magically transform them into a good developer....You've either
got it, or you don't. No amount of putting your nose to the grindstone
will change that."

Her view is that "The only thing standing between you-as-amateur and
you-as-expert is dedication. All that talk about prodigies? We could all
be prodigies (or nearly so) if we just put in the time and focused. At
least that's what the brain guys are saying. Best of all--it's almost
never too late."

Peter Norvig's "teach yourself programming in ten years"

[http://norvig.com/21-days.html](http://norvig.com/21-days.html)

would seem to agree with Ms Sierra's 'dedication' theory.

Dave Bartlett on January 30, 2007 7:33 AM

Ben wrote:

I think this post points in the wrong direction.\
 Programming, the art of abstraction, logic, reduction, \
 and rewriting is independent of 'the real world'. \
 A great programmer can look at a program and see it's \
 beauty irrespective of it's real world significance.

Ben, there's a hell of a difference between a skilled developer and a
skilled programmer. That's the whole point of the story.

JensG\

JensG on January 30, 2007 7:43 AM

Well said, JensG. The point is that you must look beyond yourself to
improve -- not simply sharpen what you already know.

If you know a programming language, it becomes a means - a tool - not an
end in and of itself. It's just part of your skills that can't get much
better.

bryan on January 30, 2007 8:03 AM

Overrated blog post! Nothing intriguing. Actually its difficult to
describe a good programmer and I know a few folks who have gotten much
better at programming after years of programming. IMHO, good programming
is a function of your intelligence and I think great programming
requires not only intelligence but also creativity. The best programmers
I know are artists not engineers!

Kashif Razzaqui on January 30, 2007 8:03 AM

Very interesting post! IMO, the "da Vinci route" should be efficient to
excel in just about anything: Study anything even remotely related to
your field. You can get completely different insights from doing a bit
of 3D modeling, OS tweaking, web accessibility, iPod hacking, gaming,
system administration, etc.. Any of these can make you a better
programmer, by giving you a view of how different types of systems
behave - Or maybe more important, give you ideas of how they /should/
behave.

l0b0 on January 30, 2007 8:21 AM

The best programmers are not normal... they are either obsessive
compulsive, bipolar, paranoid, or neurotic.

cyclo on January 30, 2007 8:58 AM

Well, to give you an idea, I program perhaps once every few months. The
few times I dive into code, I'm there for a reason. Nine times out of
tend, I write the unoptimized version within the first 10% of the time I
spend coding. The other 90% is a pretty even split between optimizing
the code and tweaking its functionality. I think the reason I never
became a hard-core programmer, even though I've been told time and time
again that I have the chops, is that I simply don't want to make the
compiler and debugger my two best friends (and worst enemies). I'm not a
social butterfly by any stretch of the imagination, but I need more
social interaction than that...

Jae on January 30, 2007 9:14 AM

You either have it or you don't...

Rabid Wolverine on January 30, 2007 9:20 AM

I think there's a common arrogance among developers that "great
programmer" == "thinks like me".\
 In one instance I was arguing for a significant abstraction layer
between some incoming data and an (informal) datamart we were building
on top of it. The incoming data was from several sources and a) was very
inconsistent, b) the developers kept making mistakes when trying to glue
all the data together so they could use it, and c) I didn't want to
impact all of the downstream apps when the incoming files were
modified.\
 My co-worker wanted very minimal abstraction, because a) more
abstraction means more code to maintain and more opportunities for bugs
and b) the incoming data only changed 2-3 times a year, and c) most of
the people who used the data were familiar with the incoming feeds but
wouldn't have access to the code base, and therefore if we put too much
code in between it would be hard for them to differentiate bad incoming
data (very common) from bugs in our code (also very common).\
 For 2-3 days each of us was convinced that the other was at best naive,
more likely stupid, and most certainly SUCKED as a developer. But
ultimately we were both right -- we were just optimizing different
aspects of the problem based on our gut feel for where the pain would be
in the future.\
 As a coda, I ended up winning the argument and (as I was debugging and
modifying the abstraction layer over the next few years) developing what
I call "The Law of Constant Pain". There is no optimal spot where pain
is minimized -- all good solutions trade off pros and cons in equal
measure, so all good solutions are equally bad and good. Making it
better in one aspect makes it (at best) equally worse in another aspect.
(And of course there are lots of solutions that are worse all around,
but the people who come up with those are the \*real\* lousy
developers.)

JPLemme on January 30, 2007 9:29 AM

This may be tangential to the topic ...

"The main idea of our column is that “talent” is overrated; that
practice really does make perfect; and that it’s a good idea to do what
you truly love in life, because if you don’t, you probably won’t work
hard enough at it to get really good."

[http://www.freakonomics.com/blog/2007/01/08/practice-makes-perfect-revisited/](http://www.freakonomics.com/blog/2007/01/08/practice-makes-perfect-revisited/)

kloodge on January 30, 2007 9:29 AM

One more point. If I owned Microsoft I'd want cracker-jack programmers.
But if I ran an IS department I'd rather have VB6 developers with
business degrees than brilliant computer science grads. This is a bit
bigoted, but real life is messy and inelegant. People with an CS
background too often seem to get frustrated (or even angry) when their
elegant solutions can't handle the real world. Obviously the real world
is at fault in these situations, and therefore it just has to change.
People with an IS background seem more willing to tolerate messy
solutions if it means the business problem gets solved quickly and
correctly.

I know there's a balance, but it should be tilted towards the activities
that earn money for the company, not to some propeller-heads
mathematically pure conceptual frameworky things.

JPLemme on January 30, 2007 9:42 AM

Great post, Jeff.

The problem with more of the "people" aspects of software development,
is that I believe these skills are very hard to learn or practice.

If it doesn't come naturally to you, can you practice or learn enough
about how to get people to like you and have decent human interactions
with them?

With some things you can "fake it til you make it," but the real issue
you're dealing with in personal dynamics is empathy. If you're just
naturally nihilistic and have no empathy for others, and use them as
objects or ends to your means, then no matter how hard you fake it --
that will still show through.

And it is a damn shame that more corporations don't recognize the value
of the 99%'s out there. It's why anyone in that category should
seriously consider starting up their own thing with a couple of buddies
-- it's the only way you can extract that latent value.

Shanti Braford; On Web Apps on January 30, 2007 10:00 AM

Gates was only saying that programming experience won't turn one into a
good programmer. He never said that programming experience will not make
one a better programmer.

anonymous on January 30, 2007 10:07 AM

i will say that it is not about coding but more about understanding the
requirements. if you know the problem then you can solve it, but if you
don't, how can you solve it? think about it. a better programmer is one
who understands the problem faster then others.

thecancerus on January 30, 2007 10:19 AM

I used to spend every waking moment in front of the computer also. Then
I got tendinitis so bad I almost had to change careers. Now I spend no
more then 4 or 5 hours a day at the computer, but I'm still a damn good
programmer.

Be careful people.

MarketGarden on January 30, 2007 10:26 AM

Interpretation: Compare "programmers" to singer-songwriters. A would-be
songwriter can practice on an instrument all day and all night for
years, but if they have nothing to say, then? "Passionate" people throw
themselves into larger concerns, and out of their experience and
personality will have plenty to say as a result. ... As one side-effect,
programmers will say it through code.

Jerry Van Polen on January 30, 2007 10:35 AM

Gates was only saying that programming experience won't turn one into a
good programmer. He never said that programming experience will not make
one a better programmer.

That's right. And what I'm saying is that the skill differential between
mediocre and great programmers is so wide and so vast, that \*the tiny
differences between great programmers are barely significant\*.

Once you're a great programmer, you're worth 5, 10, 20 mediocre
programmers. See the many data points cited here:

[http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000072.html](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000072.html)

Studies have proven time and time again that, statistically, there is
\*NO\* correlation between years of experience and skill in software
development. This isn't conjecture, this isn't my opinion, it's a
scientific result supported by experiments and hard data.

Therefore, if you are \*already\* a great programmer, and you want to
distinguish yourself even further, you should learn complementary
disciplines, rather than going for the 99.5th percentile skill level of
greatness. Nobody can tell a 99.5th percentile coder from a 98th
percentile coder. But they can sure as heck tell the difference between
a great coder and a great coder who \*also\* understands usability, the
business, the customer, etcetera.

Jeff Atwood on January 30, 2007 10:41 AM

In my opinion this is disheartening for beginners,\
 Someone who does not know anything about programming and wants to
learn\
 you say something like this to them and there goes there desire to
learn out the window\~\~!!!!!\
 My comment on this is Not everyone is a great programmer to start They
worked diligently at it and if there not so great it's because someone
like you wrote a statement like this and discouraged there desire!

Donna on January 30, 2007 10:46 AM

I am, as the original post describes, a "good" programmer, but \*not\* a
great one.

My algorithms/modules/programs work. They do the job. But, they are
neither elegant nor efficient. No matter how much I programmed, no
matter how much I studied, my raw ability to problem-solve did not
improve. My repertoire of languages improved. My documentation improved.
Other things improved. But, not my ability to produce elegant code, nor
efficient code.

I've recognized this, and thus, when required to produce code, explain
to the requestor that the end result will work, but will likely be
brute-force rather than elegant, and can always be edited for
efficiency.

\
 .

Izzy on January 30, 2007 11:50 AM

Bravo. Exactly what I've been telling fellow developers for years.

TJ on January 30, 2007 11:52 AM

"...Competent software developers have already mastered the skill of
programming"

Can some one define the programming skill? if there's such a thing.

Programming is closer to art than any other engineering profession. The
range in the solution field is so great that solutions to any problem
are as varied as the colors of the rainbow. In fact I'm willing to
assert that the reason why there are great programmers and not so great
is the same reason why there has been and will only be one Monalisa and
one DaVinci.

cland on January 30, 2007 12:18 PM

Well most programmers aren't in the 90th percentile, so there's still
room for programming improvement. I'm not convinced by this "innate
talent" argument. See my response:
[http://haacked.com/archive/2007/01/30/Better\_Programming\_By\_Programming\_Better.aspx](http://haacked.com/archive/2007/01/30/Better_Programming_By_Programming_Better.aspx)

Although I do agree that the "tangential" skills are very important for
\*all\* levels of developers and most likely will make a developer more
valuable faster than improving programming skills.

Haacked on January 30, 2007 12:47 PM

i wonder why programming is related to art? I taught programming is all
about the logic. Good programmer can solve a problem by producing a good
logic. from my perspective, coding is more like giving instructions for
computer to do this and that.correct me if i'm wrong..

tokan on January 31, 2007 2:26 AM

While I think there are "problems" with programmers
([http://www.edmblog.com/weblog/2006/11/the\_problem\_wit.html),](http://www.edmblog.com/weblog/2006/11/the_problem_wit.html),)
I do think that most people don't want to write code
([http://www.edmblog.com/weblog/2007/01/does\_everyone\_e.html),](http://www.edmblog.com/weblog/2007/01/does_everyone_e.html),)
and could not if they wanted to. The fundamental problem is that
programmers and business users have a different perspective
([http://www.edmblog.com/weblog/2005/08/different\_persp.html)](http://www.edmblog.com/weblog/2005/08/different_persp.html))\
 JT\
 [http://www.edmblog.com](http://www.edmblog.com)\

James Taylor on January 31, 2007 2:35 AM

ooops..grammar mistake.."taught" should be "thought"

tokan on January 31, 2007 3:57 AM

Who is talking, and who is who? A good programmer doesn't have time for
morals and bitching on the others. Also, what made a good programmer is
subjective. It could happen that junior finds something that the others
didn't see. Is probably the only substancial contribution that this
person made but it may save the compagny from hell ... Remember Jobs,
every buddy was looking at him as a looser. He 's making a tremendous
comeback.

If your not the father of a great system or builder of a new program,
your just a vulgar refurbisher of what you never build, because you dont
have the guts to work on real things; but i'm sure you prove that you
have fast mind but rabbits are better with estragon then a turtles.

N.B. dont see any discussion on real code... maibe you working on boring
stuff...

Raphael on January 31, 2007 4:34 AM

I little off topis but this is a message for all of the young guys out
there that think programming is their life.

Go out, meet people, travel, get a girlfriend, get married, have kids,
buy a house, shower, learn how to dress, DON'T WORK AT HOME, DON'T PLAY
COMPUTER GAMES ALL NIGHT........

I'm sure I will get lots of responses about this and that and excuse
after excuse.......

IT needs to get a life outside of IT and interact with REAL PEOPLE.

Thanks,

Trev\

Trev on January 31, 2007 4:48 AM

I think that Ben and Ken have it right. Steve, your article describes
well how to be a software manager, but if you love coding and want to
understand it as well as possible and work creatively and incisively in
the field (as, say, a mathematician might without wanting to do the
admin work of a department chair) then the question is "Is there a path
to the deep understanding that a guru has?" and several posts have said
"Yes!".

Barry on January 31, 2007 4:48 AM

If chess is analogous to programming, why can't computers write \
 code as well as they play chess?

Well they can't \*yet\*. Just as computers couldn't play chess very well
20 years ago. Today, they still can't compete against humans at GO.

Give it time.

Haacked on January 31, 2007 8:50 AM

\1) If you're reading this blog-- and by this blog I mean any technical
blog-- it's unlikely that you are a mediocre programmer.

\2) Mediocre programmers don't even know that they are mediocre. So if
you think you are, that level of self-awareness automatically
disqualifies you from mediocrity.

\3) Mediocre programmers don't read technical blogs, or Joel on
Software, or Code Complete, or Don't Make Me Think, etcetera.

If you're reading this, I can assure you that you, yes you, ARE a good
programmer. Trust me.

Jeff Atwood on January 31, 2007 10:32 AM

True, totaly agree with you,

But what i think is just 2 years is not enough to predict the issues in
the design, for that one need at least 4 years of coding experience.\

Anoop Jose on January 31, 2007 12:13 PM

What junk is this ?

Atreya on January 31, 2007 12:28 PM

"To truly become a better programmer, you have to to cultivate passion
for everything else that goes on around the programming." 100% agree.
Now based on that premise, how can you become better programmer even
without programming?

fade2blac on January 31, 2007 12:52 PM

If chess is analogous to programming, why can't computers write\
 code as well as they play chess?

Well they can't \*yet\*. Just as computers couldn't play chess very well
20 years ago. Today, they still can't compete against humans at GO.

\
 Maybe if we could ensure that only "good programmers" are working on
it, instead of a bunch of mediocre programmers, they could solve the Go
problem as well have computers write code for the rest of us.

Just a mediocre programmer

Petey on February 1, 2007 2:58 AM

Reg Braithwaite pointed out an excellent discussion of this article at
Reddit. It's well worth reading if you got this far.

[http://programming.reddit.com/info/11vft/comments](http://programming.reddit.com/info/11vft/comments)

My favorite comments?

edheil: reddit loves self-improvement.\
 schizobullet: Unfortunately, it doesn't love being told what it loves.

That HAS to be one of the funniest things I've read this year.

Jeff Atwood on February 1, 2007 3:55 AM

BS.

I'm sorry, but I don't believe for a second that you can't change enough
personally to make the leap from unable to be even a decent coder to
becoming a great one. It's got nothing to do, however, with classical
education. Much more to do with actual change.

I know I am an exponentially better coder than I was when I started
coding fourteen or fifteen years ago. I can tell in my code, I can tell
in the way I study others' code, I can tell in the way I approach the
problems involved.

People change drastically over the course of their lives, they just
generally do it for the worse mentally. It's an amazingly stupid
assumption that people who started out as bad programmers will end up
that way. I used to believe it. Then I saw people I originally had
judged completely incapable of certain things accomplish them. And saw
people I assumed I would hear from later disappear.

One thing I do know is that looking to a corporate manager for a
judgment like this is not a great idea. You're looking in the completely
wrong place. University profs who push coders from zero to 'usable
newbie' are the people I would ask.

Dylan Brams on February 1, 2007 10:22 AM

The best advice I can give programmers is NOT to restrict your career
path down one programming language / platform. Don't avoid C\# if you
have been a VB programmer for 5 years.

Why? Because in the end, it's all the SAME.

C++, C\#, VB, ColdFusion, Pascal, PHP, whatever....

Sure, each language has it's quirks and idosyncrasies. Some languages
take more care than others. In the end, you pick the right development
tool for the job and go with it.

If you are a good programmer with a solid development methodology you
can "code" in anything....

Shawn C on February 1, 2007 11:20 AM

I think the reason there's so much a mixed response to this post is that
the act of programming is defined differently by different people.

If you define "programming" as the time when you sit in front of a
computer writing code, than the running or chess metaphors make sense
and you might claim more practice will always make you better.

If, however, you include the process of figuring out what and how to
code, and the way your code gets used and maintained after you finish,
then it seems to me this article makes a pretty solid argument.

For me code is meaningless if it's not used by someone. If you want it
to be used, you need to understand people, markets, business etc. There
is no way to learn this things by just coding some more.

Nir on February 2, 2007 8:55 AM

Moishe Lettvin of Google was also reading Programmers at Work, and
offers his unique take on this topic:

[http://moishelettvin.blogspot.com/2007/01/less-programming-more-skill.html](http://moishelettvin.blogspot.com/2007/01/less-programming-more-skill.html)

Love the Heinlein quote:

"A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an invasion,
butcher a hog, conn a ship, design a building, write a sonnet, balance
accounts, build a wall, set a bone, comfort the dying, take orders, give
orders, cooperate, act alone, solve equations, analyze a new problem,
pitch manure, program a computer, cook a tasty meal, fight efficiently,
die gallantly. Specialization is for insects."

Jeff Atwood on February 2, 2007 11:27 AM

Bullocks!

Bullocks! on February 2, 2007 11:51 AM

All you have to do is to validate this is look at who you work with and
estimate if they are a good programmer (ie can get the job done) or a
great programmer (can get the job done, but know why they're doing the
job - ie the bigger picture).

A great programmer produces a better solution because they understand
the problem better, due to the insight gained from non programming
activities, and interests.

Understanding the business as an abstraction and as an instance, the
specific way this company does business, will allow the programmer to
become great.

Paul Broadfoot on February 4, 2007 12:35 PM

If "conscious mind" is a fraction (ex: 10%) of one's active brain power,
the rest being "sub-conscious"...

How can we know what programs and designs are being written by our
subconscious when we are and aren't programming?\

Keta Meme on February 5, 2007 12:56 PM

Jeff Atwood on January 29, 2007:\
 To truly become a better programmer, you have to to cultivate passion
for everything else that goes on around the programming.

I agree, and that is the same with any other creative work I did :-)

Shawn C on February 1, 2007 11:20 AM \
 The best advice I can give programmers is NOT to restrict your career
path down one programming language / platform. \
 Don't avoid C\# if you have been a VB programmer for 5 years.

Of course not. Platforms are everchanging, and that's good, because
every single one of them sucked (because they were written for
architectures which where slow, had almost no RAM and every design
decision was made in favour of speed, smallness and cheapness,
disadvantaging programmer convenience/expressiveness in the process).

Why? Because in the end, it's all the SAME.

From the programmer's standpoint, there's a HUGE scale on them. So no,
they are not.

C++, C\#, VB, ColdFusion, Pascal, PHP,

These are all the same, yeah.

whatever....

Look at Dylan, Haskell, Logo, Pliant, Prolog, Ruby, Python, Boo or a
language of the LISP family and say that again.

Sure, each language has it's quirks and idosyncrasies. Some languages
take more care than others. In the end, you pick the right development
tool for the job and go with it.

Yeah. But if every tool was the same you could pick any of them for
anything.

But none is the same. Members of the C family are mostly the same
language-wise but completely different framework-wise.

All others are completely different from the C family.

If you are a good programmer with a solid development methodology you
can "code" in anything....

... [anything] that you know

Keta Meme on February 5, 2007 12:56 PM:\
 If "conscious mind" is a fraction (ex: 10%) of one's active brain
power, the rest being "sub-conscious"...

How can we know what programs and designs are being written by our
subconscious when we are and aren't programming?

When something comes into your mind fully formed and you are making up
some kind of reason for it, it came from the subconsciousness.\
 That is, the subconsciousness raised an interrupt on the consciousness
once the subconsciousness was done processing whatever it wanted to
process (passing a tiny amount of data with it).\

Danny Milosavljevic on February 7, 2007 7:07 AM

Similar comments from Peter Varhol, editor of FTPOnline:

[http://www.ftponline.com/weblogger/forum.aspx?ID=11DATE=01/17/2007blog=\#717](http://www.ftponline.com/weblogger/forum.aspx?ID=11DATE=01/17/2007blog=#717)

--\
 Don't know where to put yourself in these situations? They are all
around you, but they almost certainly have nothing to do with sitting at
your desk and coding away for five days a week. There is a Toastmasters
session in your cafeteria after hours, a standards committee meeting at
your competitor down the street, and a study group in a conference room
at lunchtime. Open source projects are begging for help, in testing and
documentation writing, if not coding. You can be doing all of these
things with an e-mail or two. Yes, work is demanding (I worked twelve
hours last weekend, and Nancy Grace is on CNN as I write this), but just
doing your job in tech is the surest way to a lengthy stay the
unemployment line.\
 --\

Jeff Atwood on February 14, 2007 2:34 AM

I was surfing the comments (still not finished yet) and ended up in a
Wikipedia on Dijkstra, and one of his quote:

"Computer Science is no more about computers than astronomy is about
telescopes."

Of course, he was talking about computer science, not programming :P

kwonghou on February 18, 2007 8:26 AM

I was fascinated at reading the article published in new scientist on
the subject of expertise. The conclusion of which was that expertise was
a product of motivation.

It's all too easy to categorize people as having or not having some
mysterious talent, and although I wouldn't say that there aren't people
that are born with innate cognitive abilities, because after all
thoughts are dependent on the brain that thinks them, which is itself a
biological machine whose nature is subject to genetics. BUT!!!! What the
science says is that even this so called 'talent' is merely a
head-start, what makes the expert and expert is the motivation and / or
inspiration to endure the pain involved with learning more and more new
things.

Humans are built for survival and because of this it's normal for us to
take the path of least resistance, this is why it you are more likely to
hear an insightful response to philosophical questions from a youth than
you do from a 40 year old, (well at least in my experience), the youth
finds it easier to think out of the box and is motivated to learn new
perspectives, whilst the adult has become comfortable with his box and
has lost his ability to see why he might want to change it. I suspect
most coders are mostly motivated to code in order to make themselves a
living amongst other things, it's not that they are unable to be great,
they just aren't motivated to be so.

Good programmers aren't people that see the bigger picture, people that
see the bigger picture tend to become better programmers (because they
are inspired and motivated to do so).

I think that the opinion expressed in this article tends to be born out
of a frustration with the unfair reality whereby the motivated experts
often go unrewarded for their works of genius whilst at the same time
the mediocre's seem to be rewarded for creating bad code.

So, yes, there are definitely good coders, but they are not 'special'
per se, they just happen to be an anomalous group of inspired and
motivated individuals.

persistent ponderer on April 7, 2007 10:47 AM

What makes anyone really good at what they do is how much they value
what they do. If that value is greater than other values then skill will
always increase, talent will develop and brilliance will emerge.

How much do you care about your job?

The Spaghettio on April 19, 2007 7:20 AM

There is the question of what is a better programmer, for example in the
following who is the better programmer.

Three Programmers A, B and C go for a job interview. They are all
required at the same time. The first part of interview process is to
write a program. All three programmers are given the same problem and
time to complete it.

When the time is up programmers A and B have completed the program and
when the company running the interview tests the results they find both
A and B have produced programs that produce the correct results although
programmer A's programmer is three times faster that and uses half the
memory of programmer B's program. Programmer C said he simply could not
work out how to solve the problem.

The company had never emplyed a programmer and had the bright idea of
asking programmer C to look at the programs of A and C and give them his
comments.

After looking at Programmer A's program he said he could not follow the
logic and still had no idea how the problem was solved.

After looking at Programmer B's program he said now he understands how
the problem was solved and he could now write the program.

So clearly A and B are both good programmers but which is the better
programmer?

In some enviroments programmer A would be prefered but my feeling is
that most companies would be much better of with programmer B.

Although it can be very satisfying to write a peace of very clever code
I feel it is better code if it is clear and easy to understand by other
programmers and even yourself in 2 years time.

So the first question is not how to become a better programmer but what
is a better programmer.\

Brett Collins on April 19, 2007 7:24 AM

I don't think there are better or worse programmers, just more or less
creative problem solvers. Programming languages are certainly more
complex today with all of the different classes and methods available,
but 99% of the time I still use the same commands I used in Microsoft
BASIC 1.0. I still use GOSUB...RETURN, except that in today's code the
subroutine is tied to an event or object in a GUI. I still use FOR NEXT
loops and instead of PEEKS and POKES into memory, I wread and write
from/to a relational database. I still use algerbra and calculus to
manipulate my data. The only thing that really changes is the business
needs and how you go from wher you're at to where you need to go. This
is what Bill Gates was talking about. Are you a programmer or an
architect?

Joshua Pery on April 19, 2007 8:52 AM

To me programming is about being in a mental zone, much like an artist,
a guitarist, a writer, etc. It's about creating something useful and/or
entertaining from nothing. One moment your editor screen is blank and
the next moment it contains a function that transforms data into magic.
Programming allows us to exercise the part of us that makes us superior
to all other life forms.

I've been programming since 1980 (Z-80 assembler) but have been
programming professionally for only 1.5 years. In college, I was
continually tops in my computer courses--certainly not a result of my
memory (it is poor) but rather because I "get it." Learning new
programming languages comes easily for me because it makes sense to my
logical brain. It could be assembler, c/c++/c\#, VB (ugh), Java,
etc—it’s not the syntax that matters. What matters is the
problem-solving ability that generates into code. Great programmers have
great problem-solving ability, at least when it comes to code. But ask
me to replace front disc brakes or replace a ceiling fan and I'll
struggle. Thus, I am great at programming (IMHO) but am challenged in
other areas. No matter how much I practice, I'm never going to be a
Liberace or Elton John on the piano. The piano is analog and my noggin
doesn't process that communication medium very well.

I find the "average" programmer is pretty good at his/her craft but
lacks a perfectionist attitude. I am big on writing code that is well
structured, well documented, and well executed. As I told my boss early
in my career, I don't know how to write crappy code quickly so if you
want me to learn then you're going to have to teach me.

Average programmers rely on debuggers and code analyzers to identify
flaws but great programmers can write great code inherently. Not to say
they don't use debugger/analyzers (they ARE perfectionists) but those
tools find much less to scream about in the latter case.

I also find that average programmers stop asking Why/How when they find
a solution to a problem. I push further upstream to find answers to
deeper questions. I want to know Why this works or How that black box is
doing whatever it is doing.

Just as there are great leaders, great communicators, great poets, etc,
there are great programmers. Not everyone agrees on what makes them
great or what constitutes greatness but history will record their
relative value.

troyS++;

\
 “What is not documented is not done”\

Troy S. on May 4, 2007 3:45 AM

find the "average" programmer is pretty good at his/her craft but lacks
a perfectionist attitude. I am big on writing code that is well
structured, well documented, and well executed. As I told my boss early
in my career, I don't know how to write crappy code quickly so if you
want me to learn then you're going to have to teach me.

freeporn on June 1, 2007 10:50 AM

"Learn about your users. Learn about the industry. Learn about your
business."

Very wise.

rvdavid on November 28, 2007 4:56 AM

you scared the hell out of me with you introduction...

then talking about passion made my eyes shines ...

i can recall, every time i felt enjoying programming, was in a field
that i loved and understood ( mainly local graphical modeling
application )

thanks for this post !

fasteez on January 7, 2008 4:31 AM

interesting, a lot of it is simply true...\
 some few facts can be questioned,\
 anyway, a very instersting point of view.

edo on January 8, 2008 5:10 AM

a 'good developer' ... develops code that doesn't\
 hog the system's resources ... minimum number of \
 lines of code and in minimum time.

This is the worst definition possible. It's the exact opposite of the
point Jeff was making. In order to be a good programmer, you have to
\*stop\* obsessing soley about those programming-related metrics, and
come up for air to observe what your users want, what your customers do,
how your business works and how your customer's businesses work, where
your industry niche is heading.

How about defining a good programmer as someone who can reliably produce
programs which are useful enough to more than offset the costs of the
time spent creating it?

Jonathan Hartley on February 8, 2008 5:34 AM

I was recently explaining to some interviewers, who, after reviewing my
resume, remarked upon all my computer related endeavors. They kept
asking me about several trivial aspects of the position and whether I
thought that 'with my background', I could accomplish the task. It may
have seemed obvious to them that I was holding back a chortle or snicker
because I realized that they were already pigeon-holing me like many
people I know often do. They don't understand that I'm not interested in
the actual computer but its versatility. The computer is a tool, that
when well honed allows anyone in any field to become more productive.
Being a programmer allows me to go through many different fields, sort
of like an actor, for as long as the project is in development.
Afterwards, I use the talent to explore some other interest. I have not
been contacted as yet. :(

Ezrad Lionel on February 10, 2008 7:39 AM

I think some very good points have been made. But lets be clear about
one thing though. There is no such thing as a professional
programmer/developer working in the industry; they're actually software
engineers.

A software engineer working in the industry doesn't just spend his/her
time coding all day: documentation must be written, creating test
strategies for the code, communicating with colleages clients,
understanding the client's actual issue/requirements, dealing with
incompetent management, resolving disagreements etc. Improving all of
these areas helps you become engineer.

Having said that though, I do believe that you can improve your coding
skills. As others have pointed out the most important factor is
dedication. I don't think it's a coincidence that the best programmers
out there also tend to view programming as a hobby. No matter what field
you work in you can't improve unless you are willing to learn and work
hard. As as long as you keep finding challenges for yourself, you'll
keep improving.

Keep learning new material that changes the way you think about
programming. This will actually change the way you think about problems
and the way you come up with solutions for them.

evil bob on February 14, 2008 5:52 AM

Brett Collins on April 19, 2007 06:24 AM:

"In some enviroments programmer A would be prefered but my feeling is
that most companies would be much better of with programmer B."

Right, and that's how we get platforms implementing Shellsort instead of
Quicksort. Thank you for your insight, now I understand better why our
industry really suffers.

\
 Jeff Atwood on January 30, 2007 10:41 AM:

"Nobody can tell a 99.5th percentile coder from a 98th percentile
coder."

Wrong. I can tell the difference, and so can they. But Brett Collins has
kindly pointed out why they and I are both unemployable.

98 on February 15, 2008 12:52 PM

but thing is that every time i felt enjoying programming, was in a field
that i loved. \
 wat i suggest to new bees that Keep learning new material that changes
the way you think about programming. This will actually change the way
you think about problems and the way you come up with solutions for
them.

Logical on June 6, 2008 4:15 AM

I think being a good programmer is about writing good code, but being a
great programmer is not, its mostly about the other aspects.

Neko on June 11, 2008 10:33 AM

@Brett Collins - a better programmer is the one who can write both the
readable solution and the hack-jack resource-efficient one - and will
ask you which you want.

Neko on June 11, 2008 10:37 AM

Yes, but the world is changing. I agree, it only takes a couple of
months to become a good programmer if you're fit for it. I mean, getting
the grips of things like syntax, OOP, pointers/references, reflection
etc. But that's the easy part!\
 I just started to work as a consultant and what's really important
nowadays is to be able to see the whole perspective and understand
things like interoperability, design patterns and architecture. You need
to master several languages, frameworks, and technologies to be able to
choose the right one for the application (like ORM, MVC, AoP, IoC/DI,
etc. etc). Programming is the easy part! It's an continuing process
because the world is always changing. Today, you need to be more than
just a good programmer, you need to be able to adapt to change and
contribute. IMHO, also excuse my bad engrish =)\

Peter on August 22, 2008 4:49 AM

The concept of a 'versatilist' which sounds similar to the kind of
developer you've described in this post.

[http://www.gartner.com/press\_releases/asset\_139314\_11.html](http://www.gartner.com/press_releases/asset_139314_11.html)

Adam Kahtava on November 13, 2008 9:20 AM

I got the impression from reading this blog entry that if you are a
mediocre programmer who tries hard, then you will always be mediocre
regardless of any incresed effort to improve your performance. I've also
read other blogs where people rant about mediocre programmers ruining
the profession. Usually I find those complainers are know-it-all
programming snobs who think they are God's gift to humanity. Performance
is subjective - we are evaluated by other humans - and some of the best
programmers also happen to make the worst managers.

There are lots of actors out there in the world, yet a very small
percentage will win an Oscar. Many actors may never have the opportunity
to appear in a feature film or Broadway play. Yet they are dedicated to
their craft and have passion for what they do. They may not be famous,
and critics may pan their peformance if they do get a worthy gig. Does
that make them mediocre?

I've worked in the software and I.T. business for over 20 years and held
many programming jobs. Some bosses thought I was incompentent (not
worthy of Senior Level Developer title said one) while other bosses
thought I was a godsend. How can the same programmer be both? What I've
learned over the years is:

\1) Don't take manager appraisals too seriously because they are
subjective. I worked at one company where my first manager liked me but
her successor - who was a pompus know it all - hated me and had me fired
after three months using poor performance as an excuse.

\2) If you love what you are doing, you will do it well. I had one job
where I did nothing but fix bugs in other people's code (no comments in
code) for four years, and I grew to hate that job. That's like the actor
playing bit parts over and over and never getting to shine in the lead
role. How can you win an Oscar doing that? If you get mediocre
assignments that you hate, you will do mediocre work - even when you TRY
HARDER. The jobs where I did well had assignments where I could learn
and grow. If the passion isn't there, time to move on (change jobs or
even change careers).

\3) Believe in yourself. If others think you are a mediocre programmer,
their opinion means nothing. If they convince you that you're a mediocre
programmer, then you will become a mediocre programmer. And don't
compare yourself with others. These things will destroy your confidence.
Just do the best you can, and if you feel you are doing a good job, that
is all that matters. Everyone's career path is different. As Shakespeare
wrote:

Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness
thrust upon ’em. Twelfth Night Quote, Act ii. Scene 5.

Tom on March 13, 2009 5:02 AM

To sum it up: the article implies that one should THINK out of the box.\
 Don't stay stuck in programming. Rather, you should try to look outside
the programming realm and try to understand the things/factors that
shapes how you program.

Benj on April 29, 2009 12:37 PM

this is rubbish...

KECE on May 8, 2009 7:07 AM

[More
comments»](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/01/how-to-become-a-better-programmer-by-not-programming/comments/page/2/#comments)

The comments to this entry are closed.

Content © 2013 [Jeff Atwood](https://profiles.google.com/codinghorror1).
Logo image used with permission of the author. © 1993 Steven C.
McConnell. All Rights Reserved.

Newer »

[Stylesheets for Print and
Handheld](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/01/stylesheets-for-print-and-handheld.html)

« Older

[Extending The Windows Vista Grace Period to 120
Days](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/01/extending-the-windows-vista-grace-period-to-120-days.html)

Resources

[About Me](/blog/2004/02/about-me.html)\
 [@codinghorror](http://twitter.com/codinghorror)\
 [discourse.org](http://www.discourse.org)\
 [stackexchange.com](http://stackexchange.com)\
 [Recommended
Reading](/blog/2004/02/recommended-reading-for-developers.html)

[![image](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/images/pub/feed-icon16x16.png)
Subscribe in a reader](http://feeds.feedburner.com/codinghorror) \
 [![image](/blog/images/mail.png) Subscribe via
email](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=codinghorror&loc=en_US)

Coding Horror has been continuously published since 2004. Browse the
**[complete post
archives](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives.html)**.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![Count of RSS readers](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~fc/codinghorror?bg=EEEEEE&fg=111111&anim=0)   [Traffic Stats](http://my.statcounter.com/project/standard/stats.php?project_id=2600027&guest=1)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![web
metrics](http://c26.statcounter.com/counter.php?sc_project=2600027&java=0&security=dcff5548&invisible=0)](http://www.statcounter.com/)

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/b?c1=2&c2=6035669&c3=&c4=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.codinghorror.com%2Fblog%2F2007%2F01%2Fhow-to-become-a-better-programmer-by-not-programming.html&c5=&c6=&c15=&cv=1.3&cj=1)
http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/01/how-to-become-a-better-programmer-by-not-programming.html
