[The Blog of James Long, a Mozilla webdev](/)

-   [twitter](https://twitter.com/jlongster)
-   [github](https://github.com/jlongster/)
-   [rss](http://feeds.feedburner.com/jlongster)

Removing User Interface Complexity, or Why React is Awesome
===========================================================

May 13 2014

I've been studying frameworks and libraries like Ember, Angular, and
React the past several months, and given Web Components a lot of
thought. These all solve similar problems to varying degrees, and are in
conflict in some ways and in harmony in others.

I'm mostly concerned with the core problems of data binding and
componentizing UIs. After much research and usage of the technologies
mentioned above, I found [React](http://facebook.github.io/react/) to
provide the best solution.

I ask that you set aside your framework prejudices and read this post
with an open mind. This post is not to evangelize React specifically,
but to explain why its technique is profound. I want developers steeped
in other technologies to take a hard look at these techniques,
particularly those involved in Web Components.

This post actually started as a call to address problems with Web
Components. But I've come to realize a few things: the bottom half of
the Web Components effort (unlocking all the builtin stuff so that even
native tags could be rewritten) is a great thing, Web Components are a
step up from current technology regardless, and I don't want to do harm
to that effort. My concerns are quite vague as well, so it doesn't make
a good blog post. I can't reconcile what I want components to be with
Web Components, and it's much better if I fully explain what I think is
the best solution and leave it up to the readers to apply if they
choose.

The Bloop Library
-----------------

I'm not going to focus on React specifically. In fact, just in case it
would be distracting, we're not going to use React at all.

We're going to build our own library from scratch that is highly
inspired by React. This lets us play with all kinds of ideas with a very
small amount of code. This is prototype-quality, of course, and wouldn't
scale to large UIs, but using something like React would make it scale.

Let's call our library **Bloop**. Our library should let us change data
and transparently keep the UI in sync. It should allow us to structure
the UI into components, and flow data between them sanely.

First, we need a way to represent behavior and structure. It's easy to
write behaviors as JavaScript, but what about the structure? We could
use a templating language that looks like HTML, but it's much easier
just to represent it in JavaScript too. It keeps the component together,
makes it trivial to wire up the structure with behaviors, and allows us
to easily share the component. Just imagine being able to use JavaScript
for importing a component:

    var MyToolbar = require('shared-components/toolbar');

You can't even do something as basic as that with Web Components.

This is what a component looks like with our library. It shows a number
and a button that, when pressed, increments the number.
`getInitialState` returns the initial state of the object that can be
accessed with `this.state`.

    var Box = Bloop.createClass({
      getInitialState: function() {
        return { number: 0 };
      },

      updateNumber: function() {
        this.state.number++;
      },

      render: function() {
        return dom.div(
          this.state.number,
          dom.button({ onClick: this.updateNumber }, 'Increment')
        );
      }
    });

Next, we need a way to render it into the page. You can use
`renderComponent` to render a component instance into a DOM element.

    Bloop.renderComponent(Box(), document.body);

There's a problem with this though: it doesn't rerender whenever the
state changes. The `Box` component mutates its state directly, so we
don't know when something has changed. We could add a `set` method that
tells us what is changing, but then we need to figure out which pieces
of the DOM to update, which gets really complicated. Here's an idea:
rerender the entire app whenever a change is made. That way, it's really
easy to keep everything in sync.

But how do we know when a change is made? A `set` method to change state
could trigger a rerender, but there's an even easier way to react to
changes: continuously call `renderComponent` with
`requestAnimationFrame` to repaint the UI, and only change the DOM when
the component returns different content. **React does not do this** by
default; it has a `setState` method to change state that triggeres a
repaint. Let's just have some fun with `requestAnimationFrame`, even
though you would never do this in production. View the full source code
for this example
[here](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-a-increment-js).

    var box = Box();

    function render() {
      Bloop.renderComponent(box, document.body);
      requestAnimationFrame(render);
    }

    render();

Rerendering everything (and only applying it to the DOM when something
actually changed) vastly simplifies the architecture of our app.
Observables+DOM elements is a leaky abstraction, and as a user I
shouldn't need an intimate knowledge of how the UI is kept in sync with
my data. This architecture opens up lots of various ways to optimize the
rendering, but it's all completely transparent to the user.

The Bloop library is only [250 lines of
JavaScript](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/11192270), and simply
renders a component by setting `innerHTML` if changed. Since you usually
have a top-level `App` component, that means the entire app is rendered
with `innerHTML`. I told you it was prototype-quality, right? In a
twisted, absurd way, it's shocking how far you can go with this. And the
kicker is you can easily swap this out with React to get much better
rendering performance, since React has a virtual DOM and will only touch
the real DOM when needed. That also solves various problems like
rerendering forms and other controls which have focus.

Since everything is rerendered on update, we've decoupled data binding
and views and libraries can reuse it in many different ways like
[Om](https://github.com/swannodette/om). Even though React implements
complicated optimizations, the mental footprint is as small as our Bloop
library which is a breathe of fresh air amid other complicated data
binding technologies.

Data Flow
---------

We expressed our component's structure in JavaScript instead of trying
to mangle it into the DOM. This makes data flow very natural, since we
have direct access to the component instance. If you use the DOM
directly, it's common to have to wire up the data flow in JavaScript
afterwards. A templating engine with automatic bindings helps, but it
still creates more complexity than necessary. The days of having one big
HTML file are gone; components and their behaviors are intimately
dependant and should be encapsulated like so.

Aren't you tired of having to query the DOM tree and manually manage the
structure to create UIs? Web Components doesn't solve this at all, it
just tries to encapsulate the work. **The problem is that building apps
*is* building components, so you inevitably are forced back into the
manual DOM management to create your app-specific components** (like how
you constantly have to create directives in Angular). You also need to
jump into JavaScript to configure and wire up any Web Components you
used. It's a very messy abstraction, and fools you into desiring a [pure
HTML-based declarative way](http://www.polymer-project.org/) to write
apps, which is like wanting steak but eating liver.

Frameworks like Ember and Angular help a lot with this. However,
templates and controllers are still separated and data binding still
leaks into your app (especially in Angular, `$scope.$apply` is the
devil). Ember does a better job than most, but you still have to declare
data dependencies manually (computed properties) and ultimately accept
its way of modelling data. That's not a bad thing but there are things
you can't do that we will study later in this article. It simply comes
down to the framework vs. library debate.

In Bloop, there's a clear and simple flow of data: data is passed down
and events flow up. Here is the same example as before, but with
multiple components to demonstrate data flow. In all of my examples, you
can assume `dom` is set to `Bloop.dom` and that the `App` component is
continuously rendered with `requestAnimationFrame` like you saw in the
first section.

There are two components: `Toolbar` which makes a few buttons that
change the number, and `App` which is our top-level component that uses
`Toolbar`. `App` has state: the current value of the number. It passes
this state into `Toolbar`, so that toolbar can decrement and increment
the number. But `Toolbar` never touches our app state; it can make a new
number, and call the `onChange` handler with the new number, but it
can't do anything else. It's up to the `App` component to bind the
`onChange` handler to one of its methods which takes the new number and
actually modifies the state.

This introduces another aspect of Bloop: properties. Properties are
available as `this.props` and represent the data passed into the
component. Components should never mutate their properties. View the
full source for this example
[here](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-b-increment-decrement-js).

    var App = Bloop.createClass({
      getInitialState: function() {
        return { number: 0 };
      },

      updateNumber: function(value) {
        this.state.number = value;
      },

      render: function() {
        return dom.div(
          dom.span(this.state.number),
          Toolbar({
            number: this.state.number,
            onChange: this.updateNumber
          })
        );
      }
    });

    var Toolbar = Bloop.createClass({
      render: function() {
        return dom.div(
          dom.button({
            onClick: this.props.onChange.bind(null, this.props.number - 1)
          }, 'decrement'),
          dom.button({
            onClick: this.props.onChange.bind(null, this.props.number + 1)
          }, 'increment')
        );
      }
    });

State flows down the components, and events flow up. Note that while
properties should never be changed, state is mutable. Properties can't
be changed because they are inherited every time the component is
rendered, so any changes will be lost.

The difference between state and properties can be useful. It makes it
clear what state the component owns. It's best to keep most of your
components stateless, and isolate state into as few places as possible.
This makes it easy to rationalize about your app and how it changes over
time. We will explore this more in the next section.

This example is trivial and so far we've been pretty abstract. You will
see more complex examples throughout this post. Communication between
components is difficult to do right, and Bloop and React provide you
with this simple data flow for handling it, even if it may be limiting
in certain cases (you many find yourself adding a lot of trivial methods
to `App` to change app state). Check out
[this](http://facebook.github.io/react/tips/communicate-between-components.html)
and
[this](http://facebook.github.io/react/tips/expose-component-functions.html)
page from React about it. Near the end of article, we will explore
modifications to this approach.

Let's quickly look at a more complex example. This app has tabs that
switch between content, and a settings pane that lets you customize it.
[View the code
here](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-c-tabbed-app-js).
There is a
[Tabs](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-c-tabbed-app-js-L65)
component that responds to tab changes by calling the `onChange`
handler, and we [bind
that](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-c-tabbed-app-js-L59)
to the `changeTab` method on our top-level `App` component.

Additionally, there is a
[`Settings`](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-c-tabbed-app-js-L87)
component that renders the settings form. Whenever a setting changes,
all it does is call its `onChange` property, which [we
bound](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-c-tabbed-app-js-L45)
to the `changeSetting` method on `App`.

Fundamentally, this is a declarative way to construct components. The
`render` method continuously constructs a new UI based on simple
JavaScript objects, binding specific events to component methods.

Explicit App State
------------------

You're probably already familiar with the pattern of attaching event
handlers to components. As described above, Bloop takes this even
further though, making it clear that events flow upward, and since
everything is in JavaScript it's dead simple to take a JavaScript
function and bind it right onto the component. You do this declaratively
within `render` when creating the component.

There's a deeper reason why it's so important to make data flow clear
and simple: it encourages you to keep state in as few places as possible
and make most of your components stateless. It's easy to create complex
data flows in Bloop with many small components, and keep track of what's
going on. Additionally, instead of setting state directly on a component
instance, Bloop makes it explicitly a separate JavaScript object.
Components that do have state can access it with `this.state`. A
component that uses state must implement a `getInitialState` method that
returns the initial state object.

Tearing apart state from the component instance turns out to be really
powerful. It fits well with the model that most of our state is held at
the top-level, since most of your UI is now described in one simple
JavaScript object. This has far-reaching consequences.

1.  **It's adaptable.** The state object doesn't have to be a native
    JavaScript object; it can be anything you return in
    `getInitialState` (or your own way of passing state around, if you
    choose). Want to use [persistent data
    structures](https://github.com/swannodette/mori) instead? Go ahead!
2.  **It's easy to snapshot.** Given a specific state, you can guarantee
    what the resulting HTML of a component will be. If you simply save
    the state object somewhere, you can load it up later and render your
    component exactly like it was when you saved it. An undo system is
    trivial: just save the state, and restore it (which is especially
    trivial with persistent data structures).
3.  **It's easy to test and prerender.** Similar to point \#2, you can
    easily test components by rendering them with a specific state to an
    HTML string and comparing the output. You can even manually fire off
    event handlers which change state and test the changes. Finally,
    prerendering on the server is as trivial as it sounds: render the
    top-level component to a string and serve it up, and when loaded on
    the client the library will bind all the event handlers to the
    prerendered DOM.

The principle to learn is that things like DOM elements are basically
native objects, like an open file instance. You don't stick user-land
state onto file instances, do you? They are unserializable and slow.
Since the DOM doesn't contain our app state, we just have to deal with a
simple JavaScript object, declaratively render a structure based on it,
and let the library figure out how to reify it into DOM elements.

The kicker is that the opportunity for great performance falls out of
this naturally. React creates a lightweight Virtual DOM every time
components are rendered, and diffs them to figure out the smallest
amount of real DOM changes needed. The result is astonishing performance
since DOM changes are the slowest part. Of course, you don't have to do
this; Bloop naively sets `innerHTML` if the contents have changed, but
the abstraction is there to allow great optimization.

Ok, enough philosophizing, let's get to some examples.

Looking at our app with tabs again, there is a
[`Tabs`](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-c-tabbed-app-js-L65)
component. This is a completely stateless component, and the top-level
`App` component actually handles the tab change and [changes
`selectedItem` in the app
state](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-c-tabbed-app-js-L21).
You might think that `Tabs` *should* handle the state to be reusable,
but if you think about it, *something* needs to be hooked up to change
the panes when a tab is changed. This makes the dependency on that state
explicit and easy to rationalize about.

In fact, all of our app state is a single object attached to the `App`
component. It's easy to expose this as an editor, which is what you see
below. This is the raw state of the app, and is synced both ways. Change
it manually in the textarea below (change `bigFonts` to `true`, for
example), and click around the app to watch changes come in.

waiting on app state...

When you change it in the textarea above, it is sent to the app and
applied by running `app.state = JSON.parse(msg.data)`. It's that easy.

Generally, your app state will roughly correspond to your UI structure.
I think this is what efforts like Web Components are trying to do (hide
details about the UI structure), but it doesn't really work if you
insist on still using the DOM. This is what you *really* want: a
stripped down, bare representation of your app. Your UI structure falls
out it of this, not the other way around.

The app state is so *simple* and easy to access. Let's implement an undo
system and see if we were telling the truth about how easy it is. Let's
use a different example app for this: a basic twitter clone ([code
here](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-d-twitter-js)).

Type some messages into the text input, and press "enter" to submit
them. Click the star to "star" a few of them. Now press the "undo"
button several times and you will watch your previous actions wash away.

How is this implemented? Here is the code:

    var prevStates = [JSON.stringify(appState)];

    function undo() {
      while(1) {
        var state = JSON.parse(prevStates.pop());

        if(!prevStates.length) {
          // This is the initial app state, so unconditionally apply it
          // and push it back onto the history so we don't lose it
          appState.feed = state.feed;
          prevStates.push(JSON.stringify(state));
          break;
        }
        else if(JSON.stringify(appState.feed) !== JSON.stringify(state.feed)) {
          // We found a state where the feed has changed, so apply it
          appState.feed = state.feed;
          break;
        }
      }
    }

    function render() {
      app.state = appState;
      var changed = Bloop.renderComponent(app, document.body);
      if(changed) {
        prevStates.push(JSON.stringify(appState));
      }
      requestAnimationFrame(render);
    }

    render();

All we have to do is save the app state when it is changed, and apply a
previous state when an undo is requested. There are a few
architecture-specific details here: `Bloop` doesn't currently have an
event when the state changes, but `Bloop.renderComponent` does return if
the rendered output has changed, so we use that to detect when we should
save the state. And since we are using simple JavaScript objects, we use
`JSON.parse` and `JSON.stringify` to take snapshots of the state. This
is very simplistic, but you could implement more powerful ways to track
changes like using persistent data structures.

Note that we only undo changes to the feed. In `undo`, we walk back
through the history and find an app state where the `feed` structure has
changed, skipping over any other state changes. It's up to you to
determine what you want to track and undo.

If you're undoing UI that is backed by a data store, you also need to
perform the undo in the backend. You can use a versioned data store,
which makes it just as trivial. Or you can diff the app state and
generate actions to perform the undo. This is something that needs to be
explored more, and is the reverse of usual undo methods, where you
manually undo changes in the database and then re-fetch data and refresh
the whole UI. That might be just fine for your app, but it gets tedious
to hand-code undo code paths for every single model. This is far more
powerful because it's automatically applicable to any component.

Forcing your data through the backend data store to allow undo is also
limiting. What if you want to not actually persist the action for 30
seconds, and give the user the chance to undo before it even hits the
backend? Our architecture makes it trivial to go ahead and update the UI
as if it has persisted in the data store, but let the user undo the
action before it actually hits the backend. We get all of this for free.

[This pixel editor named Goya](http://jackschaedler.github.io/goya/),
written in [Om](https://github.com/swannodette/om/) which is built on
top of React, leverages this technique for tracking history, and
allowing you to travel through changes. [Here's all the
code](https://github.com/jackschaedler/goya/blob/master/src/cljs/goya/timemachine.cljs)
it took to implement undo/redo. When it's independent of your data
structure (as a good abstraction should be!) it's trivial!

One last example of explicit app state: prerendering and testing.
Instead of using `Bloop.renderComponent`, you can use
`Bloop.renderComponentToString` to render a component with properties to
a string of HTML. This makes it trivial to test, just render the
component and compare the output. This is the toolbar from the example
on the right (if you [open the
example](http://jlongster.com/s/bloop/app3/) in a tab, you can run this
code from the console):

    Bloop.renderComponentToString(Toolbar({ username: 'foo' }))

    // Output:
    // "<div class="toolbar"><em>Logged in as foo</em><button>settings</button><button>undo</button></div>"

You might not want to compare strings directly, but you could do
specific tests to make sure that changes in state relate to changes in
structure.

If you want to prerender your app, you could simply render the top-level
`App` component with the initial app state on the server and send it to
the client. The library can then simply bind event listeners to the
already rendered DOM (Bloop does not support this, but React does). It's
literally just a few lines of code.

Bloop itself is extremely simplistic, but we already get most of this
for free. React makes it easy to use these techniques for real apps
because it handles all the hard stuff, too. There's a lot of win here,
and a lot of opportunity for interesting advancements.

Game Loop
---------

So far, we've said that the structure of a component created within the
`render` method is *declarative*. This is because you generate the
structure based off of the app state, nothing else. As the app state
changes, so does your structure. However, it may not look like
traditionally declarative code, since any JavaScript can be run:

    Bloop.createClass({
      render: function() {
        var items = this.props.items.filter(function(item) {
          return item.isVisible;
        });

        return items.map(function(item) {
          return dom.div(item.name);
        });
      }
    })

There is a declarative current running underneath this code. But we can
look at it in a different light: almost as if we're operating in an
[immediate rendering](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_mode) mode, as
if the `dom.div` and such functions painted the element instantly. In
fact, since we're using `requestAnimationFrame` to repaint the UI, this
is extremely similar to how game developers render UI in games.

Game developers discovered [immediate-mode graphical user
interfaces](https://mollyrocket.com/861) years ago (watch that video,
it's awesome). Their power lies in the fact that you just run normal
JavaScript to paint your UI: conditional elements are literally
expressed as `if(shown) { renderItem(); }`, and that data is always
synced with the UI because the UI is always redrawn.

The web traditionally operates in [retained
mode](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retained_mode), where the DOM exists
as an in-memory representation of the current UI, and you poke it to
make changes. Since we can't throw away the current web, our library
still creates DOM elements using our declarative forms. So we're
basically operating in an immediate mode on top of a retained mode, and
I'm starting to think that it actually gets us the best of both worlds.
React provides "lifecycle" methods which trigger at various stages
within the retained DOM, which gives you an escape hatch when you need
to handle things like focus. Even if it might be better for React if
there was a lower-level rendering API, just using the DOM works pretty
well.

If our library can make edits to the retained DOM fast enough, we can
actually treat our `render` methods as if they were in immediate mode.
That means we can implement performance-sensitive things like 60 FPS
animations, or a UI that changes when scrolling. You may think it's
taboo not to use CSS for animations, but with `requestAnimationFrame`
and other advancements, people are finding out that you can actually use
JavaScript for better and even more performant animations, as seen with
[Velocity.js](http://julian.com/research/velocity/).

React, with its Virtual DOM, is fast enough to implement animations that
depend on user input, like scrolling or cursor position. Bloop is dumb
and uses `innerHTML` so it's not nearly as good, but on desktop it's at
least good enough to show an example.

A wonderful thing about immediate mode is that it's easy to do things
like [occlusion
culling](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_surface_determination).
Another corollary to graphics engines, occlusion culling is an algorithm
to optimize rendering by figuring out which elements are actually
visible, and only rendering them. Imagine you have a list of 5000 items.
If you create a big `<ul>` with all of them, the DOM will grow large,
take up lots of memory, and scrolling will be degraded (*especially* on
mobile). If you know only 25 are on the screen at once, why do we need
to create 5000 DOM elements?

You should only need 25 DOM elements at one time, and fill them out with
the 25 elements that pass the occlusion test. I made this component in
just a few minutes to make this work (view the full code
[here](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-e-optimized-list-js)):

    var App = Bloop.createClass({
      getInitialState: function() {
        return { pageY: 0,
                 pageHeight: window.innerHeight };
      },

      componentDidRender: function() {
        var numItems = this.props.items.length;
        document.querySelector('.list').style.height = numItems * 31 + 'px';
        var ul = document.querySelector('ul');
        ul.style.top = this.state.pageY + 'px';
      },

      render: function() {
        var pageY = this.state.pageY;
        var begin = pageY / 31 | 0;
        // Add 2 so that the top and bottom of the page are filled with
        // next/prev item, not just whitespace if item not in full view
        var end = begin + (this.state.pageHeight / 31 | 0 + 2);

        var offset = pageY % 31;

        return dom.div(
          { className: 'list',
            style: 'position: relative; top: ' + (-offset) + 'px' },
          dom.ul(
            this.props.items.slice(begin, end).map(function(item) {
              return dom.li(null, item.title);
            })
          )
        );
      }
    });

This assumes each list item has a height of `31px`, and can calculate
which set of items are visible given the page scroll position and window
height. The `render` method only returns a fixed size of `<li>` elements
always (probably \~25), no matter how large the list is. The `<ul>` is
shifted as the user scrolls so it actually stays in one place, but the
outer container is given the full height of the list so that we still
have an accurate scrollbar.

Go ahead, right-click and inspect one of the list elements in your
browser's developer tools. Look around and you'll only see a modest
number of `<li>` elements.

Here's the code for initializing and rendering this component:

    // application code

    var items = [];
    for(var i=0; i<5000; i++) {
      items.push({
        title: 'Foo Bar ' + i
      });
    }

    var app = App({ items: items });

    window.addEventListener('scroll', function(e) {
      app.state.pageY = Math.max(e.pageY, 0);
      app.state.pageHeight = window.innerHeight;
    });

    // render

    function render() {
      Bloop.renderComponent(app, document.body);
      requestAnimationFrame(render);
    }

    render();

When the `scroll` event is fired, we simply update `pageY` and
`pageHeight` and the new DOM elements are filled with the right data,
giving the illusion that the user is scrolling down a large list. This
basic implementation isn't perfect, but it certainly could be with some
better edge case handling.

This is all just with my stupid
[Bloop](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/11192270) library, just
imagine what you could do with React's optimizations.

Contrast this with what it would take to implement with Web Components.
You would have to manually manage all of those DOM nodes yourself, and
take special care to remove ones outside of the viewport, or even better
reuse them and reposition them. Retained mode is a sucky way of doing
UIs, and I think we'd all be better off if we switched to thinking in
immediate mode.

Additional Abstractions
-----------------------

### Cortex

We went over how data flows in Bloop and React: data is passed down and
events are triggered up through event handlers. This is a good way for
components to talk to each other, but it has drawbacks. Sometimes it's
annoying to create many trivial event handlers, and you also *want* to
be able to wrap state management into components instead of it all being
top-level.

There are many ways to improve this, and React actually encourages its
community to build interesting abstractions on top of React.
[Cortex](https://github.com/mquan/cortex/) is one such enhancement of
handling state.

Cortex is a way to have one single data structure for app state, but
have the ability to take pieces of it and hand it off to child
components. Child components have the ability to *change* state
themselves, and we get update notifications. It's basically a type of
"observable", but the difference is we don't care what has changed. When
we get an update notification, we just trigger a rerender of the whole
app.

Here's what using Cortex looks like:

    var data = { settings: { username: "James "},
                 number: 0 };

    var cortex = new Cortex(data, function() {
      // Called whenever an update happened
      Bloop.renderComponent(app, document.body);
    });

In my component, if I had a `Settings` component I could pass it down
like so:

    var App = Bloop.createClass({
      render: function() {
        return dom.div(
          MainContent(),
          Settings({ state: this.state.settings })
        );
      }
    });

And the `Settings` component could update it like so:

    var Settings = Bloop.createClass({
      updateUsername: function(username) {
        this.state.username.set(username);
      },

      render: function() {
        // ...
      }
    });

The callback we passed to `Cortex` would be called and the app would be
rerendered. Now we can do more sophisticated state management, letting
components manage the state themselves but still having full access to
the state from the top-level through our normal `data` object. It's like
proper Object-Oriented Programming!

Indeed, if you are familiar with [functional
lenses](https://www.fpcomplete.com/school/to-infinity-and-beyond/pick-of-the-week/basic-lensing)
this sounds all too familiar to you. Unfortunately, this is still a
mutable data structure, but it still solves the encapsulation problem.

The above code is Bloop-specific. In React, you would need to access the
cortex object in `props` in components that get state passed down. Bloop
allows you to specify a `state` property when creating the component,
and it is used as the component's initial state.

Here is the full increment/decrement example using Cortex (or as a
[gist](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92#file-f-cortex-js)):

    var dom = Bloop.dom;

    // components

    var App = Bloop.createClass({
      render: function() {
        return dom.div(
          dom.span(this.state.number.val()),
          Toolbar({
            number: this.state.number
          })
        );
      }
    });

    var Toolbar = Bloop.createClass({
      updateNumber: function(value) {
        this.props.number.set(value);
      },

      render: function() {
        return dom.div(
          dom.button({
            onClick: this.updateNumber.bind(null, this.props.number.val() - 1)
          }, 'decrement'),
          dom.button({
            onClick: this.updateNumber.bind(null, this.props.number.val() + 1)
          }, 'increment')
        );
      }
    });

    var data = { number: 0 };

    var cortex = new Cortex(data, function() {
      // Called whenever an update happened
      Bloop.renderComponent(app, document.body);
    });

    // render

    var app = App({ state: cortex });
    Bloop.renderComponent(app, document.body);

### Bacon.js

If functional reactive programming (FRP) is your thing, I'm sure you've
heard of [bacon.js](https://github.com/baconjs/bacon.js/tree/master).
Since Bloop doesn't care where your data comes from, it's trivial to use
FRP to construct data flows and update the UI whenever something comes
down the stream. [This
post](http://joshbassett.info/2014/reactive-uis-with-react-and-bacon/)
describes how to do just that with bacon.js.

### Addon: Immutability Helper

React actually comes with an addon that lets you update data structures
persistently, the [immutability
helper](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/update.html). The neat
thing is that you can still use native JavaScript data structures, but
create new objects when performing updates instead of mutating them
directly.

It's a little unwieldy to use, however, but with some [macro
magic](http://sweetjs.org/) it could be quite handy.

### Om

[Om](https://github.com/swannodette/om/) is a much more sophisticated
abstraction on top of React. It is a ClojureScript interface to React
that
[introduces](http://swannodette.github.io/2013/12/17/the-future-of-javascript-mvcs/)
a different way of defining components and managing state. Since
ClojureScript uses persistent data structures natively, app state is
immutable and persistent. This immutability makes it trivial to check
what has changed, since you just have to compare pointers.

Om uses `requestAnimationFrame` to ~~render the app continuously~~ batch
rendering (all requests for rerendering happen just once on the next
animation frame). If something has changed, it's very quick to detect
the components that have changed with a few more pointer checks and
rerender those components.

Immutability turns out to be an incredible companion to React, making
not only app state explicit but also changes over time. Keeping a
history involves only keeping pointers to previous app states.

I would love to dive into this more, but that is for a future post.

### Mori

[Mori](https://github.com/swannodette/mori) is a library for persistent
data structures for JavaScript. These are same data structures used by
ClojureScript. If you want a lot of the same benefits that Om takes
advantage of, like optimized rendering and easy history and undo, you
can use this library to manage app state as a persistent data structure.

I haven't seen too many persistent JavaScript react apps yet, but there
is [this post](http://tech.kinja.com/immutable-react-1495205675) about
using a [different](https://github.com/hughfdjackson/immutable)
persistent data structure library for building apps.

Finale
------

We've shown how React chooses a level of abstraction that is powerful,
and also adaptive. We haven't explored the details of React's
optimizations with the virtual DOM, but you can find more about that in
the [docs](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/getting-started.html)
and around the web. I wanted to focus on the abstract idea itself, and
show how well it works even with my stupidly simple Bloop library.

Bloop follows most of React's APIs and conventions, with the following
differences: in React, the properties object is required when creating
DOM elements, so you have to pass `null` if there aren't any
(`dom.div(null, 'text')`). There also is no `componentDidRender` in
React, but there is `componentDidUpdate`.

This post assumes Web Components as a way to build applications; some
people look at Web Components as a low-level way to share custom
components. Even so, everything is stuck in a global namespace and you
miss out on all the goodness of modules. Also, it's a hard sell when
something like React can't even use it, and it's hard to load in
components from a completely different system, especially when you want
to take advantage of what you already have.

There's no doubt that you will need more than this for building apps: we
haven't mentioned routing, data stores, controllers, and all that stuff.
I like the ability to choose which libraries to use and see how they are
all pieced together. See React's post about the
[flux](http://facebook.github.io/react/blog/2014/05/06/flux.html)
architecture, a
[router](https://github.com/andreypopp/react-router-component), and
[more](https://medium.com/react-tutorials/c00be0cf1592).

It's no coincidence that immutability and persistence was repeatedly
referenced throughout this post. Using persistent data structures with
this architecture really does allow for powerful features. However, even
with simple mutable JavaScript objects, React brings a powerful UI and
component system to the table.

Read more:

-   [Bloop](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/11192270)
-   [Source
    code](https://gist.github.com/jlongster/3f32b2c7dce588f24c92) for
    all the demos
-   React [docs](http://facebook.github.io/react/)
-   React provides
    [JSX](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/jsx-in-depth.html), an
    extension to JavaScript, which allows you to embed HTML directly in
    JavaScript. This makes it look like you are writing HTML, but all it
    does it transform to the native `dom.*` calls. I prefer not to use
    it, but it's helpful if you are working with designers.
-   [Om](https://github.com/swannodette/om/) is a ClojureScript
    interface to React
-   [Mori](http://swannodette.github.io/mori/) is a library of
    persistent data structures for JavaScript
-   [Cortex](https://github.com/mquan/cortex/) provides a way to
    centrally manage data
-   [Mercury](https://github.com/Raynos/mercury) is an attempt to
    rebuild something like React, separating functionality into lots of
    modules like
    [virtual-dom](https://github.com/Matt-Esch/virtual-dom). It features
    immutable-by-default state and virtual DOM, see more comparison
    [here](https://github.com/Raynos/mercury#mercury-vs-react).
-   [Mithril](http://lhorie.github.io/mithril/) is another framework
    that has similar ideas, and the author has commented and ported my
    examples
    [here](http://lhorie.github.io/mithril-blog/an-exercise-in-awesomeness.html).

[ui](/tag/ui) [react](/tag/react)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

[Vote on HN](http://news.ycombinator.com/submit)

### Read Next

[](/Writing-Your-First-Sweet.js-Macro)

Writing Your First Sweet.js Macro
=================================

This is the first entry in a series about writing JavaScript macros with
[sweet.js](http://sweetjs.org/). You will learn how to write your first
macro, basics of pattern matching, and how to run the sweet.js compiler
and use sourcemaps for debugging.

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

Made by James Long, a senior web developer for
[Mozilla](http://mozilla.org). Feel free to [get in
touch](mailto:longster@gmail.com) with me.

© James Long 2012-2013

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://jlongster.com/Removing-User-Interface-Complexity,-or-Why-React-is-Awesome
