[![The
Economist](//cdn.static-economist.com/sites/all/themes/econfinal/images/svg/logo.svg)](/)

Essay · DEMOCRACY
=================

1.  [1](sites/all/modules/custom/ec_essay)

    What’s gone wrong with democracy

2.  [2](sites/all/modules/custom/ec_essay)

    The return of history

3.  [3](sites/all/modules/custom/ec_essay)

    The democratic distemper

4.  [4](sites/all/modules/custom/ec_essay)

    Getting democracy right

-   [Terms of use](/legal/terms-of-use)
-   [Feedback](#)
-   [Privacy
    policy](http://www.economistgroup.com/results_and_governance/governance/privacy)
-   [Cookies info](http://www.economist.com/cookies-info)

© The Economist Newspaper Limited 2014. All rights reserved.

-   -   XShare
-   [217](/node/21596796/comments)
-   -   Sponsored by
    [![image](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/esay&t=subs%3Dn%26wsub%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dessay_logo&sz=70x70&tile=2&c=121231613)](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/esay&t=subs%3Dn%26wsub%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dessay_logo&sz=70x70&tile=2&c=121231613)

What’s gone wrong with democracy
--------------------------------

![Protestors in Kiev, February
2014](http://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/esch1a_0.jpg?1393485312)

Democracy was the most successful political idea of the 20th century.
Why has it run into trouble, and what can be done to revive it?

THE protesters who have overturned the politics of Ukraine have many
aspirations for their country. Their placards called for closer
relations with the European Union (EU), an end to Russian intervention
in Ukraine’s politics and the establishment of a clean government to
replace the kleptocracy of President Viktor Yanukovych. But their
fundamental demand is one that has motivated people over many decades to
take a stand against corrupt, abusive and autocratic governments. They
want a rules-based democracy.

It is easy to understand why. Democracies are on average richer than
non-democracies, are less likely to go to war and have a better record
of fighting corruption. More fundamentally, democracy lets people speak
their minds and shape their own and their children’s futures. That so
many people in so many different parts of the world are prepared to risk
so much for this idea is testimony to its enduring appeal.

Yet these days the exhilaration generated by events like those in Kiev
is mixed with anxiety, for a troubling pattern has repeated itself in
capital after capital. The people mass in the main square.
Regime-sanctioned thugs try to fight back but lose their nerve in the
face of popular intransigence and global news coverage. The world
applauds the collapse of the regime and offers to help build a
democracy. But turfing out an autocrat turns out to be much easier than
setting up a viable democratic government. The new regime stumbles, the
economy flounders and the country finds itself in a state at least as
bad as it was before. This is what happened in much of the Arab spring,
and also in Ukraine’s Orange revolution a decade ago. In 2004 Mr
Yanukovych was ousted from office by vast street protests, only to be
re-elected to the presidency (with the help of huge amounts of Russian
money) in 2010, after the opposition politicians who replaced him turned
out to be just as hopeless.

Democracy is going through a difficult time. Where autocrats have been
driven out of office, their opponents have mostly failed to create
viable democratic regimes. Even in established democracies, flaws in the
system have become worryingly visible and disillusion with politics is
rife. Yet just a few years ago democracy looked as though it would
dominate the world.

In the second half of the 20th century, democracies had taken root in
the most difficult circumstances possible—in Germany, which had been
traumatised by Nazism, in India, which had the world’s largest
population of poor people, and, in the 1990s, in South Africa, which had
been disfigured by apartheid. Decolonialisation created a host of new
democracies in Africa and Asia, and autocratic regimes gave way to
democracy in Greece (1974), Spain (1975), Argentina (1983), Brazil
(1985) and Chile (1989). The collapse of the Soviet Union created many
fledgling democracies in central Europe. By 2000 Freedom House, an
American think-tank, classified 120 countries, or 63% of the world
total, as democracies.

Representatives of more than 100 countries gathered at the World Forum
on Democracy in Warsaw that year to proclaim that “the will of the
people” was “the basis of the authority of government”. A report issued
by America’s State Department declared that having seen off “failed
experiments” with authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government,
“it seems that now, at long last, democracy is triumphant.”

Such hubris was surely understandable after such a run of successes. But
stand farther back and the triumph of democracy looks rather less
inevitable. After the fall of Athens, where it was first developed, the
political model had lain dormant until the Enlightenment more than 2,000
years later. In the 18th century only the American revolution produced a
sustainable democracy. During the 19th century monarchists fought a
prolonged rearguard action against democratic forces. In the first half
of the 20th century nascent democracies collapsed in Germany, Spain and
Italy. By 1941 there were only 11 democracies left, and Franklin
Roosevelt worried that it might not be possible to shield “the great
flame of democracy from the blackout of barbarism”.

The progress seen in the late 20th century has stalled in the 21st. Even
though around 40% of the world’s population, more people than ever
before, live in countries that will hold free and fair elections this
year, democracy’s global advance has come to a halt, and may even have
gone into reverse. Freedom House reckons that 2013 was the eighth
consecutive year in which global freedom declined, and that its forward
march peaked around the beginning of the century. Between 1980 and 2000
the cause of democracy experienced only a few setbacks, but since 2000
there have been many. And democracy’s problems run deeper than mere
numbers suggest. Many nominal democracies have slid towards autocracy,
maintaining the outward appearance of democracy through elections, but
without the rights and institutions that are equally important aspects
of a functioning democratic system.

Faith in democracy flares up in moments of triumph, such as the
overthrow of unpopular regimes in Cairo or Kiev, only to sputter out
once again. Outside the West, democracy often advances only to collapse.
And within the West, democracy has too often become associated with debt
and dysfunction at home and overreach abroad. Democracy has always had
its critics, but now old doubts are being treated with renewed respect
as the weaknesses of democracy in its Western strongholds, and the
fragility of its influence elsewhere, have become increasingly apparent.
Why has democracy lost its forward momentum?

![A statue of Stalin is carted away after the fall of the Soviet
Union](http://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/esch2.jpg)

The return of history
---------------------

THE two main reasons are the financial crisis of 2007-08 and the rise of
China. The damage the crisis did was psychological as well as financial.
It revealed fundamental weaknesses in the West’s political systems,
undermining the self-confidence that had been one of their great assets.
Governments had steadily extended entitlements over decades, allowing
dangerous levels of debt to develop, and politicians came to believe
that they had abolished boom-bust cycles and tamed risk. Many people
became disillusioned with the workings of their political
systems—particularly when governments bailed out bankers with taxpayers’
money and then stood by impotently as financiers continued to pay
themselves huge bonuses. The crisis turned the Washington consensus into
a term of reproach across the emerging world.

Meanwhile, the Chinese Communist Party has broken the democratic world’s
monopoly on economic progress. Larry Summers, of Harvard University,
observes that when America was growing fastest, it doubled living
standards roughly every 30 years. China has been doubling living
standards roughly every decade for the past 30 years. The Chinese elite
argue that their model—tight control by the Communist Party, coupled
with a relentless effort to recruit talented people into its upper
ranks—is more efficient than democracy and less susceptible to gridlock.
The political leadership changes every decade or so, and there is a
constant supply of fresh talent as party cadres are promoted based on
their ability to hit targets.

China’s critics rightly condemn the government for controlling public
opinion in all sorts of ways, from imprisoning dissidents to censoring
internet discussions. Yet the regime’s obsession with control
paradoxically means it pays close attention to public opinion. At the
same time China’s leaders have been able to tackle some of the big
problems of state-building that can take decades to deal with in a
democracy. In just two years China has extended pension coverage to an
extra 240m rural dwellers, for example—far more than the total number of
people covered by America’s public-pension system.

Advertisement

[![image](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/esay&t=subs%3Dn%26wsub%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dresp_mpu_inline_ad&sz=1024x768&tile=1&c=121231613)](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/esay&t=subs%3Dn%26wsub%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dresp_mpu_inline_ad&sz=1024x768&tile=1&c=121231613)

Many Chinese are prepared to put up with their system if it delivers
growth. The 2013 Pew Survey of Global Attitudes showed that 85% of
Chinese were “very satisfied” with their country’s direction, compared
with 31% of Americans. Some Chinese intellectuals have become positively
boastful. Zhang Weiwei of Fudan University argues that democracy is
destroying the West, and particularly America, because it
institutionalises gridlock, trivialises decision-making and throws up
second-rate presidents like George Bush junior. Yu Keping of Beijing
University argues that democracy makes simple things “overly complicated
and frivolous” and allows “certain sweet-talking politicians to mislead
the people”. Wang Jisi, also of Beijing University, has observed that
“many developing countries that have introduced Western values and
political systems are experiencing disorder and chaos” and that China
offers an alternative model. Countries from Africa (Rwanda) to the
Middle East (Dubai) to South-East Asia (Vietnam) are taking this advice
seriously.

![Chart showing Russian opinion on democracy versus economy, 2002 to
2012](http://media.economist.com/sites/default/files/cf_images/images-magazine/2014/03/01/ES/20140301_ESC001.png)

China’s advance is all the more potent in the context of a series of
disappointments for democrats since 2000. The first great setback was in
Russia. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 the democratisation of
the old Soviet Union seemed inevitable. In the 1990s Russia took a few
drunken steps in that direction under Boris Yeltsin. But at the end of
1999 he resigned and handed power to Vladimir Putin, a former KGB
operative who has since been both prime minister and president twice.
This postmodern tsar has destroyed the substance of democracy in Russia,
muzzling the press and imprisoning his opponents, while preserving the
show—everyone can vote, so long as Mr Putin wins. Autocratic leaders in
Venezuela, Ukraine, Argentina and elsewhere have followed suit,
perpetuating a perverted simulacrum of democracy rather than doing away
with it altogether, and thus discrediting it further.

The next big setback was the Iraq war. When Saddam Hussein’s fabled
weapons of mass destruction failed to materialise after the American-led
invasion of 2003, Mr Bush switched instead to justifying the war as a
fight for freedom and democracy. “The concerted effort of free nations
to promote democracy is a prelude to our enemies’ defeat,” he argued in
his second inaugural address. This was more than mere opportunism: Mr
Bush sincerely believed that the Middle East would remain a breeding
ground for terrorism so long as it was dominated by dictators. But it
did the democratic cause great harm. Left-wingers regarded it as proof
that democracy was just a figleaf for American imperialism.
Foreign-policy realists took Iraq’s growing chaos as proof that
American-led promotion of democratisation was a recipe for instability.
And disillusioned neoconservatives such as Francis Fukuyama, an American
political scientist, saw it as proof that democracy cannot put down
roots in stony ground.

A third serious setback was Egypt. The collapse of Hosni Mubarak’s
regime in 2011, amid giant protests, raised hopes that democracy would
spread in the Middle East. But the euphoria soon turned to despair.
Egypt’s ensuing elections were won not by liberal activists (who were
hopelessly divided into a myriad of Pythonesque parties) but by Muhammad
Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood. Mr Morsi treated democracy as a
winner-takes-all system, packing the state with Brothers, granting
himself almost unlimited powers and creating an upper house with a
permanent Islamic majority. In July 2013 the army stepped in, arresting
Egypt’s first democratically elected president, imprisoning leading
members of the Brotherhood and killing hundreds of demonstrators. Along
with war in Syria and anarchy in Libya, this has dashed the hope that
the Arab spring would lead to a flowering of democracy across the Middle
East.

![Chart showing American approval rating on congress, 1974 to
2014](http://media.economist.com/sites/default/files/cf_images/images-magazine/2014/03/01/ES/20140301_ESC002.png)

Meanwhile some recent recruits to the democratic camp have lost their
lustre. Since the introduction of democracy in 1994 South Africa has
been ruled by the same party, the African National Congress, which has
become progressively more self-serving. Turkey, which once seemed to
combine moderate Islam with prosperity and democracy, is descending into
corruption and autocracy. In Bangladesh, Thailand and Cambodia,
opposition parties have boycotted recent elections or refused to accept
their results.

All this has demonstrated that building the institutions needed to
sustain democracy is very slow work indeed, and has dispelled the
once-popular notion that democracy will blossom rapidly and
spontaneously once the seed is planted. Although democracy may be a
“universal aspiration”, as Mr Bush and Tony Blair insisted, it is a
culturally rooted practice. Western countries almost all extended the
right to vote long after the establishment of sophisticated political
systems, with powerful civil services and entrenched constitutional
rights, in societies that cherished the notions of individual rights and
independent judiciaries.

Yet in recent years the very institutions that are meant to provide
models for new democracies have come to seem outdated and dysfunctional
in established ones. The United States has become a byword for gridlock,
so obsessed with partisan point-scoring that it has come to the verge of
defaulting on its debts twice in the past two years. Its democracy is
also corrupted by gerrymandering, the practice of drawing constituency
boundaries to entrench the power of incumbents. This encourages
extremism, because politicians have to appeal only to the party
faithful, and in effect disenfranchises large numbers of voters. And
money talks louder than ever in American politics. Thousands of
lobbyists (more than 20 for every member of Congress) add to the length
and complexity of legislation, the better to smuggle in special
privileges. All this creates the impression that American democracy is
for sale and that the rich have more power than the poor, even as
lobbyists and donors insist that political expenditure is an exercise in
free speech. The result is that America’s image—and by extension that of
democracy itself—has taken a terrible battering.

Nor is the EU a paragon of democracy. The decision to introduce the euro
in 1999 was taken largely by technocrats; only two countries, Denmark
and Sweden, held referendums on the matter (both said no). Efforts to
win popular approval for the Lisbon Treaty, which consolidated power in
Brussels, were abandoned when people started voting the wrong way.
During the darkest days of the euro crisis the euro-elite forced Italy
and Greece to replace democratically elected leaders with technocrats.
The European Parliament, an unsuccessful attempt to fix Europe’s
democratic deficit, is both ignored and despised. The EU has become a
breeding ground for populist parties, such as Geert Wilders’s Party for
Freedom in the Netherlands and Marine Le Pen’s National Front in France,
which claim to defend ordinary people against an arrogant and
incompetent elite. Greece’s Golden Dawn is testing how far democracies
can tolerate Nazi-style parties. A project designed to tame the beast of
European populism is instead poking it back into life.

![Protests against the influence of the IMF and World Bank at a G7
summit](http://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/esch3.jpg)

The democratic distemper
------------------------

EVEN in its heartland, democracy is clearly suffering from serious
structural problems, rather than a few isolated ailments. Since the dawn
of the modern democratic era in the late 19th century, democracy has
expressed itself through nation-states and national parliaments. People
elect representatives who pull the levers of national power for a fixed
period. But this arrangement is now under assault from both above and
below.

From above, globalisation has changed national politics profoundly.
National politicians have surrendered ever more power, for example over
trade and financial flows, to global markets and supranational bodies,
and may thus find that they are unable to keep promises they have made
to voters. International organisations such as the International
Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organisation and the European Union have
extended their influence. There is a compelling logic to much of this:
how can a single country deal with problems like climate change or tax
evasion? National politicians have also responded to globalisation by
limiting their discretion and handing power to unelected technocrats in
some areas. The number of countries with independent central banks, for
example, has increased from about 20 in 1980 to more than 160 today.

From below come equally powerful challenges: from would-be breakaway
nations, such as the Catalans and the Scots, from Indian states, from
American city mayors. All are trying to reclaim power from national
governments. There are also a host of what Moisés Naim, of the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, calls “micro-powers”, such as NGOs
and lobbyists, which are disrupting traditional politics and making life
harder for democratic and autocratic leaders alike. The internet makes
it easier to organise and agitate; in a world where people can
participate in reality-TV votes every week, or support a petition with
the click of a mouse, the machinery and institutions of parliamentary
democracy, where elections happen only every few years, look
increasingly anachronistic. Douglas Carswell, a British member of
parliament, likens traditional politics to HMV, a chain of British
record shops that went bust, in a world where people are used to calling
up whatever music they want whenever they want via Spotify, a popular
digital music-streaming service.

![Chart showing European political party memberships, 1970 to
2010](http://media.economist.com/sites/default/files/cf_images/images-magazine/2014/03/01/ES/20140301_ESC003.png)![Chart
showing voter turnout by country at parliamentary elections, 1970 to
2013](http://media.economist.com/sites/default/files/cf_images/images-magazine/2014/03/01/ES/20140301_ESC004.png)

The biggest challenge to democracy, however, comes neither from above
nor below but from within—from the voters themselves. Plato’s great
worry about democracy, that citizens would “live from day to day,
indulging the pleasure of the moment”, has proved prescient. Democratic
governments got into the habit of running big structural deficits as a
matter of course, borrowing to give voters what they wanted in the short
term, while neglecting long-term investment. France and Italy have not
balanced their budgets for more than 30 years. The financial crisis
starkly exposed the unsustainability of such debt-financed democracy.

With the post-crisis stimulus winding down, politicians must now
confront the difficult trade-offs they avoided during years of steady
growth and easy credit. But persuading voters to adapt to a new age of
austerity will not prove popular at the ballot box. Slow growth and
tight budgets will provoke conflict as interest groups compete for
limited resources. To make matters worse, this competition is taking
place as Western populations are ageing. Older people have always been
better at getting their voices heard than younger ones, voting in
greater numbers and organising pressure groups like America’s mighty
AARP. They will increasingly have absolute numbers on their side. Many
democracies now face a fight between past and future, between inherited
entitlements and future investment.

Adjusting to hard times will be made even more difficult by a growing
cynicism towards politics. Party membership is declining across the
developed world: only 1% of Britons are now members of political parties
compared with 20% in 1950. Voter turnout is falling, too: a study of 49
democracies found that it had declined by 10 percentage points between
1980-84 and 2007-13. A survey of seven European countries in 2012 found
that more than half of voters “had no trust in government” whatsoever. A
YouGov opinion poll of British voters in the same year found that 62% of
those polled agreed that “politicians tell lies all the time”.

Meanwhile the border between poking fun and launching protest campaigns
is fast eroding. In 2010 Iceland’s Best Party, promising to be openly
corrupt, won enough votes to co-run Reykjavik’s city council. And in
2013 a quarter of Italians voted for a party founded by Beppe Grillo, a
comedian. All this popular cynicism about politics might be healthy if
people demanded little from their governments, but they continue to want
a great deal. The result can be a toxic and unstable mixture: dependency
on government on the one hand, and disdain for it on the other. The
dependency forces government to overexpand and overburden itself, while
the disdain robs it of its legitimacy. Democratic dysfunction goes hand
in hand with democratic distemper.

#### Video

### Spotifying politics

![Spotifying
politics](http://brightcove01.brightcove.com/5/1153191510001/201402/3232/1153191510001_3271172235001_20140206-spotify-raw2.jpg?pubId=1153191510001 "Spotifying politics")

Democracy’s problems in its heartland help explain its setbacks
elsewhere. Democracy did well in the 20th century in part because of
American hegemony: other countries naturally wanted to emulate the
world’s leading power. But as China’s influence has grown, America and
Europe have lost their appeal as role models and their appetite for
spreading democracy. The Obama administration now seems paralysed by the
fear that democracy will produce rogue regimes or empower jihadists. And
why should developing countries regard democracy as the ideal form of
government when the American government cannot even pass a budget, let
alone plan for the future? Why should autocrats listen to lectures on
democracy from Europe, when the euro-elite sacks elected leaders who get
in the way of fiscal orthodoxy?

At the same time, democracies in the emerging world have encountered the
same problems as those in the rich world. They too have overindulged in
short-term spending rather than long-term investment. Brazil allows
public-sector workers to retire at 53 but has done little to create a
modern airport system. India pays off vast numbers of client groups but
invests too little in infrastructure. Political systems have been
captured by interest groups and undermined by anti-democratic habits.
Patrick French, a British historian, notes that every member of India’s
lower house under the age of 30 is a member of a political dynasty. Even
within the capitalist elite, support for democracy is fraying: Indian
business moguls constantly complain that India’s chaotic democracy
produces rotten infrastructure while China’s authoritarian system
produces highways, gleaming airports and high-speed trains.

Democracy has been on the back foot before. In the 1920s and 1930s
communism and fascism looked like the coming things: when Spain
temporarily restored its parliamentary government in 1931, Benito
Mussolini likened it to returning to oil lamps in the age of
electricity. In the mid-1970s Willy Brandt, a former German chancellor,
pronounced that “western Europe has only 20 or 30 more years of
democracy left in it; after that it will slide, engineless and
rudderless, under the surrounding sea of dictatorship”. Things are not
that bad these days, but China poses a far more credible threat than
communism ever did to the idea that democracy is inherently superior and
will eventually prevail.

Yet China’s stunning advances conceal deeper problems. The elite is
becoming a self-perpetuating and self-serving clique. The 50 richest
members of the China’s National People’s Congress are collectively worth
$94.7 billion—60 times as much as the 50 richest members of America’s
Congress. China’s growth rate has slowed from 10% to below 8% and is
expected to fall further—an enormous challenge for a regime whose
legitimacy depends on its ability to deliver consistent growth.

At the same time, as Alexis de Tocqueville pointed out in the 19th
century, democracies always look weaker than they really are: they are
all confusion on the surface but have lots of hidden strengths. Being
able to install alternative leaders offering alternative policies makes
democracies better than autocracies at finding creative solutions to
problems and rising to existential challenges, though they often take a
while to zigzag to the right policies. But to succeed, both fledgling
and established democracies must ensure they are built on firm
foundations.

![Posters invite Iraqis to participate in a general
election](http://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/esch4_1.jpg)

Getting democracy right
-----------------------

THE most striking thing about the founders of modern democracy such as
James Madison and John Stuart Mill is how hard-headed they were. They
regarded democracy as a powerful but imperfect mechanism: something that
needed to be designed carefully, in order to harness human creativity
but also to check human perversity, and then kept in good working order,
constantly oiled, adjusted and worked upon.

The need for hard-headedness is particularly pressing when establishing
a nascent democracy. One reason why so many democratic experiments have
failed recently is that they put too much emphasis on elections and too
little on the other essential features of democracy. The power of the
state needs to be checked, for instance, and individual rights such as
freedom of speech and freedom to organise must be guaranteed. The most
successful new democracies have all worked in large part because they
avoided the temptation of majoritarianism—the notion that winning an
election entitles the majority to do whatever it pleases. India has
survived as a democracy since 1947 (apart from a couple of years of
emergency rule) and Brazil since the mid-1980s for much the same reason:
both put limits on the power of the government and provided guarantees
for individual rights.

Robust constitutions not only promote long-term stability, reducing the
likelihood that disgruntled minorities will take against the regime.
They also bolster the struggle against corruption, the bane of
developing countries. Conversely, the first sign that a fledgling
democracy is heading for the rocks often comes when elected rulers try
to erode constraints on their power—often in the name of majority rule.
Mr Morsi tried to pack Egypt’s upper house with supporters of the Muslim
Brotherhood. Mr Yanukovych reduced the power of Ukraine’s parliament. Mr
Putin has ridden roughshod over Russia’s independent institutions in the
name of the people. Several African leaders are engaging in crude
majoritarianism—removing term limits on the presidency or expanding
penalties against homosexual behaviour, as Uganda’s president Yoweri
Museveni did on February 24th.

Foreign leaders should be more willing to speak out when rulers engage
in such illiberal behaviour, even if a majority supports it. But the
people who most need to learn this lesson are the architects of new
democracies: they must recognise that robust checks and balances are
just as vital to the establishment of a healthy democracy as the right
to vote. Paradoxically even potential dictators have a lot to learn from
events in Egypt and Ukraine: Mr Morsi would not be spending his life
shuttling between prison and a glass box in an Egyptian court, and Mr
Yanukovych would not be fleeing for his life, if they had not enraged
their compatriots by accumulating so much power.

#### Video

### Democracy: A view from Cairo

![Democracy: A view from
Cairo](http://brightcove01.brightcove.com/5/1153191510001/201402/1041/1153191510001_3266485393001_20140226-essay-cairo-raw2.jpg?pubId=1153191510001 "Democracy: A view from Cairo")

Even those lucky enough to live in mature democracies need to pay close
attention to the architecture of their political systems. The
combination of globalisation and the digital revolution has made some of
democracy’s most cherished institutions look outdated. Established
democracies need to update their own political systems both to address
the problems they face at home, and to revitalise democracy’s image
abroad. Some countries have already embarked upon this process.
America’s Senate has made it harder for senators to filibuster
appointments. A few states have introduced open primaries and handed
redistricting to independent boundary commissions. Other obvious changes
would improve matters. Reform of party financing, so that the names of
all donors are made public, might reduce the influence of special
interests. The European Parliament could require its MPs to present
receipts with their expenses. Italy’s parliament has far too many
members who are paid too much, and two equally powerful chambers, which
makes it difficult to get anything done.

But reformers need to be much more ambitious. The best way to constrain
the power of special interests is to limit the number of goodies that
the state can hand out. And the best way to address popular disillusion
towards politicians is to reduce the number of promises they can make.
The key to a healthier democracy, in short, is a narrower state—an idea
that dates back to the American revolution. “In framing a government
which is to be administered by men over men”, Madison argued, “the great
difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the government to control
the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself.” The
notion of limited government was also integral to the relaunch of
democracy after the second world war. The United Nations Charter (1945)
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) established rights
and norms that countries could not breach, even if majorities wanted to
do so.

These checks and balances were motivated by fear of tyranny. But today,
particularly in the West, the big dangers to democracy are harder to
spot. One is the growing size of the state. The relentless expansion of
government is reducing liberty and handing ever more power to special
interests. The other comes from government’s habit of making promises
that it cannot fulfil, either by creating entitlements it cannot pay for
or by waging wars that it cannot win, such as that on drugs. Both voters
and governments must be persuaded of the merits of accepting restraints
on the state’s natural tendency to overreach. Giving control of monetary
policy to independent central banks tamed the rampant inflation of the
1980s, for example. It is time to apply the same principle of limited
government to a broader range of policies. Mature democracies, just like
nascent ones, require appropriate checks and balances on the power of
elected government.

Governments can exercise self-restraint in several different ways. They
can put on a golden straitjacket by adopting tight fiscal rules—as the
Swedes have done by pledging to balance their budget over the economic
cycle. They can introduce “sunset clauses” that force politicians to
renew laws every ten years, say. They can ask non-partisan commissions
to propose long-term reforms. The Swedes rescued their pension system
from collapse when an independent commission suggested pragmatic reforms
including greater use of private pensions, and linking the retirement
age to life-expectancy. Chile has been particularly successful at
managing the combination of the volatility of the copper market and
populist pressure to spend the surplus in good times. It has introduced
strict rules to ensure that it runs a surplus over the economic cycle,
and appointed a commission of experts to determine how to cope with
economic volatility.

Isn’t this a recipe for weakening democracy by handing more power to the
great and the good? Not necessarily. Self-denying rules can strengthen
democracy by preventing people from voting for spending policies that
produce bankruptcy and social breakdown and by protecting minorities
from persecution. But technocracy can certainly be taken too far. Power
must be delegated sparingly, in a few big areas such as monetary policy
and entitlement reform, and the process must be open and transparent.

And delegation upwards towards grandees and technocrats must be balanced
by delegation downwards, handing some decisions to ordinary people. The
trick is to harness the twin forces of globalism and localism, rather
than trying to ignore or resist them. With the right balance of these
two approaches, the same forces that threaten established democracies
from above, through globalisation, and below, through the rise of
micro-powers, can reinforce rather than undermine democracy.

Tocqueville argued that local democracy frequently represented democracy
at its best: “Town-meetings are to liberty what primary schools are to
science; they bring it within the people’s reach, they teach men how to
use and enjoy it.” City mayors regularly get twice the approval ratings
of national politicians. Modern technology can implement a modern
version of Tocqueville’s town-hall meetings to promote civic involvement
and innovation. An online hyperdemocracy where everything is put to an
endless series of public votes would play to the hand of
special-interest groups. But technocracy and direct democracy can keep
each other in check: independent budget commissions can assess the cost
and feasibility of local ballot initiatives, for example.

Several places are making progress towards getting this mixture right.
The most encouraging example is California. Its system of direct
democracy allowed its citizens to vote for contradictory policies, such
as higher spending and lower taxes, while closed primaries and
gerrymandered districts institutionalised extremism. But over the past
five years California has introduced a series of reforms, thanks in part
to the efforts of Nicolas Berggruen, a philanthropist and investor. The
state has introduced a “Think Long” committee to counteract the
short-term tendencies of ballot initiatives. It has introduced open
primaries and handed power to redraw boundaries to an independent
commission. And it has succeeded in balancing its budget—an achievement
which Darrell Steinberg, the leader of the California Senate, described
as “almost surreal”.

Similarly, the Finnish government has set up a non-partisan commission
to produce proposals for the future of its pension system. At the same
time it is trying to harness e-democracy: parliament is obliged to
consider any citizens’ initiative that gains 50,000 signatures. But many
more such experiments are needed—combining technocracy with direct
democracy, and upward and downward delegation—if democracy is to zigzag
its way back to health.

John Adams, America’s second president, once pronounced that “democracy
never lasts long. It soon wastes, exhausts and murders itself. There
never was a democracy yet that did not commit suicide.” He was clearly
wrong. Democracy was the great victor of the ideological clashes of the
20th century. But if democracy is to remain as successful in the 21st
century as it was in the 20th, it must be both assiduously nurtured when
it is young—and carefully maintained when it is mature.

[Read more from the print edition
»](http://www.economist.com/print-edition/)

**Photo credits by section:** 1. AP 2. Magnum; Timeline (left to right)
Reuters, Corbis, AP, AKG, Reuters, Magnum, Corbis, Getty Images, AP,
AFP, Rex Features, Alamy, Magnum, AP, Getty Images, Reuters, Magnum,
Reuters, Reuters, AP, Reuters, AP, Reuters, Reuters, Eyevine, Reuters,
Getty Images, Reuters, AP, Reuters. Reuters, AKG 3. Alamy 4. Reuters,
Getty Images, Getty Images.

-   [Contact us](/contact-info)
-   [Help](http://www.economist.com/help)
-   [About
    us](http://www.economist.com/help/about-us#About_Economistcom)
-   [Advertise with us](http://www.economistgroupmedia.com)
-   [Editorial Staff](/mediadirectory)
-   [Staff Books](/mediadirectory/books)
-   [Careers](http://www.economistgroup.com/working_with_us/job_opportunities/index.html)
-   [Site index](/content/site-index)
-   [[+] Site Feedback](javascript:void(0); "[+] Site Feedback")

-   Copyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2014. All rights
    reserved.
-   [Accessibility](/help/accessibilitypolicy)
-   [Privacy
    policy](http://www.economistgroup.com/results_and_governance/governance/privacy)
-   [Cookies info](/cookies-info)
-   [Terms of use](/legal/terms-of-use)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-a8GHW19EK4IzY.gif)

[![image](//stats.economist.com/b/ss/economistcomprod/1/H.20.3--NS/0)](http://www.omniture.com "Web Analytics")

![image](//www.bizographics.com/collect/?pid=3190&fmt=gif)

![image](//us.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.economist.com/news/essays/21596796-democracy-was-most-successful-political-idea-20th-century-why-has-it-run-trouble-and-what-can-be-do
