[OkTrends: Dating Research from OkCupid](http://blog.okcupid.com/)
==================================================================

[Join us!](http://www.okcupid.com/signup?cf=blog)

* * * * *

[Race and Attraction, 2009 – 2014](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/ "Permanent Link to Race and Attraction, 2009 – 2014")
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

September 10th, 2014 by [Christian
Rudder](http://www.twitter.com/christianrudder)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

We looked at race in one of our very first posts, and today I’d like to
revisit the topic with fresh data. This article folds in millions of
person-to-person interactions, what one human being thinks of another.
As such, it’s different from a look at, say, unemployment numbers or
test scores. So much data on race gives you people vs. the system.
OkCupid’s gives you *people vs. people*. Basically, the site’s ten-year
history has been one long episode of Judge Judy. Here’s the verdict on
race.

#### Way Back in 2009

Five years ago, the basics of race and attraction on OkCupid looked like
this:

**men**\
 – non-black men applied a penalty to black women\
 – while black men showed little racial preference either way

**women**\
 – all women preferred men of their own race\
 – but they otherwise penalized both Asian and black men

Here’s how the exact person-to-person numbers shook out:

![image](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scores2009.png?v=1)\
\

The values in these tables are “preference vs. the average.” Think of
them as how people weigh race in deciding attraction. So, for example,
in the bottom-right corner of the lower table, you see that white women
think white men are 17% more attractive than the average guy. Move one
square to the left, and you see that they think Latinos are 1% above
average, and so on.

The color is there to make the big trends easy to see.

#### Has Anything Changed?

In some ways, no. OkCupid users are certainly no more open-minded than
they used to be. If anything, racial bias has intensified a bit. Here
are the numbers for 2009 till now—use the slider to move through time.
Like a javascript DeLorean.

![2009](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scores2009.png?v=1)![2010](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scores2010.png?v=1)![2011](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scores2011.png?v=1)![2012](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scores2012.png?v=1)![2013](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scores2013.png?v=1)![2014](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scores2014.png?v=1)

2009\
 2010\
 2011\
 2012\
 2013\
 2014

These numbers reflect different people year-to-year. Together the charts
fold in data from some 25 million accounts.

One interesting thing is to compare what you see above with what those
same users have *told us* about their racial attitudes. Answers to match
questions have been getting significantly less biased over time:

![image](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/match-questions.png?v=1)\
\

And yet the underlying behavior has stayed the same.

You can use other online data to see this split personality play out
elsewhere. The night Obama was first elected was a moment of catharsis.
It really felt like something had changed about the way America
perceived and thought about race, and for at least that brief moment,
the nation appeared united. No less than Karl Rove captured the moment
well: “an African-American candidate who was aspirational and
inspirational…is very powerful. It’s a night for our country to
celebrate, and for the world to celebrate.”

Meanwhile, that same evening, American Google Searches for the word
“nigger” hit an all-time high.†

† I learned this from the work of Seth Stephens-Davidowitz, a researcher
at Google.

. . .

Anyhow, whenever I talk about this data (or the race data in my book,
[*Dataclysm*](http://www.dataclysm.org)) a few questions always seem to
come up. So I figured I’d just answer them head-on here.

**Q: Are people on OkCupid just racist?**

No. I mean, not any more than anywhere else. All the dating data I’ve
seen fits OkCupid’s pattern: black people and Asian men get short
shrift. For example, below are the numbers from DateHookup, a site that
we acquired a few years ago (but that still operates independently.)
DateHookup has a distinct userbase, a distinct user acquisition model, a
distinct interface, yet their data reflects the same basic biases:

![image](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/scoresDateHookup.png?v=1)\
\

While OkCupid is large enough that its demographics reflect the general
Internet-using public, DateHookup is a niche site particularly popular
with Latinos and blacks (those groups comprise 13% and 20% of the site,
respectively.) Other sites in our portfolio, with still different
demographics and business models, show the same attraction patterns.

**Q: Is it possible that some small number of users is throwing off the
averages?**

These biases are pervasive in the data I’ve seen. For example, 82% of
non-black men on OkCupid show some bias against black women. And,
similarly, it’s not outliers among the women driving the results. It’s a
wholesale phenomenon: the ratings for an entire population are shifted
down.

![image](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/box-plot.png?v=1)\
\

**Q: Are you saying that because I prefer to date [whatever race], I’m a
racist?**

No. An individual can’t really control who turns them on—and almost
everyone has a “type,” one way or another. However, I do think the
*trend*—that fact that race is a sexual factor for so many individuals,
and in such a consistent way—raises deeper questions. See below.

**Q: All this data is from a dating site. What does that have to do with
my life?**

There are many situations that might not be explicitly romantic, but are
nonetheless a lot like a first date. A job interview. Trying to rent an
apartment. When you meet your freshman roommates. Anytime you’re trying
to make an impression on a stranger. And science has long known that
bonuses accrue to beautiful people: they have better outcomes at work
and at school, more success with juries, even live longer lives, and so
on. In short, “beautiful people” receive a lot of the same built-in
benefits in our society that white people do.

I think that’s no coincidence. Beauty is a cultural idea as much as a
physical one, and the standard is of course set by the dominant culture.
I believe that’s what you see in the data here. One interesting thing
about OkCupid’s interface is that we allow people to select more than
one race, so you can actually look at people who’ve combined “white”
with another racial description. Adding “whiteness” always helps your
rating! In fact it goes a long way towards undoing any bias against you.

\
 ![image](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/raceattr/multirace.png?v=1)\
\
\

So, yes, this is all just dating data, but it shows who and what we
define as beautiful. And that’s something that affects everyone.

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

Buy my book! It's got stats, analysis, and data from all over. \
 \
 ![dataclysm image and
quotes](http://blog.okcupid.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/dataclysm-promo-image-495.png)
\
 \

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buy-now.png)](#)

\

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buttons/amazonbuttongraphic.png)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0385347375?ie=UTF8&tag=randohouseinc-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0385347375)
\

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buttons/bnbuttongraphic.png)](http://search.barnesandnoble.com/booksearch/isbnInquiry.asp?ISBSRC=Y&ISBN=9780385347372&cm_mmc=Random%20House-_-Dataclysm-RandomHouse-9780385347372-_-Dataclysm-RandomHouse-9780385347372-_-Dataclysm-RandomHouse-9780385347372)
\

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buttons/bamgraphic.png)](http://www.tkqlhce.com/click-2665379-10876509?SID=Dataclysm-Hardcover-RandomHouse-9780385347372&url=http://www.booksamillion.com/search?query=9780385347372}&where=Books&search.x=40&search.y=16)
\

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buttons/indieboundbuttongraphic.png)](http://www.indiebound.org/book/9780385347372?aff=randomhouse1)
\

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buttons/googlebuttongraphic.png)](https://play.google.com/store/search?q=9780385347389&c=books)
\

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buttons/newibooksbadge.png)](https://itunes.apple.com/us/book/isbn9780385347389?at=11l3IH&ct=Dataclysm-RandomHouse-9780385347389)
\
 [Purchase *Dataclysm* in the UK here](http://bit.ly/buydataclysm)
[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/js/basic/x.png)](#)

\
 \
 *Journalists, please write **press***

okcupid.com for more information.

### Leave a Reply

[Click here to cancel
reply.](/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/#respond)

Name

Email

Comment

[Submit](#)

### 52 Responses to “Race and Attraction, 2009 – 2014”

[« Older
Comments](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/comment-page-1/#comments)

1.  [September 11, 2014 at 9:09
    am](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/comment-page-2/#comment-236684)

    Amy says:

    For the folks who think this data is skewed or biased, that it
    should account for attractiveness or body type, I disagree and
    here’s why:

    This data is not from a subset of users – it’s across the board. So,
    men’s ratings of women includes all types of women in each racial
    category: heavy black women and thin black women, heavy white women
    and thin white women, ‘attractive’ latina women and ‘unattractive’
    latina women, etc. That normalizes the data – no weighting
    necessary…so to speak…

2.  [September 11, 2014 at 9:18
    am](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/comment-page-2/#comment-236685)

    BadData says:

    THIS SEEMS LIKE A POOR STUDY ON YOUR PART.

    This result seems really odd, because of how much more
    race-exclusive all groups have gotten. It signifies the possibility
    that you have tampered with your data. Because interracial dating
    and marriage have risen in the USA, but your results indicate that
    it should be otherwise.

    So, how exactly USA-focused is this data? Is the collection sample
    still the same as 5 years ago (seems unlikely), or does it include
    more countries than before?

    Considering how dominant Latinas are in winning global beauty
    pageants, along with other indicators that rate them highly, I’m
    surprised they don’t do much better. I’ve seen other studies showing
    they are extremely popular with all men.

    Unsurprisingly white women have lost popularity across the board. At
    least that is consistent with other USA-focused studies on their
    loss as desirable partners.

[« Older
Comments](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/comment-page-1/#comments)

### Dataclysm

Welcome to OkTrends! If you like this blog, you'll love this book:
*Dataclysm*. It's a look at the human side of so-called Big Data, and
brings in stuff from Twitter, Reddit, Facebook, Google, in addition to
lots of data from OkCupid. Order a copy!

\

![image](http://cdn.okccdn.com/blog/humanexperiments/DataclysmCoverSmall.png)
\
\

[![image](http://dataclysm.org/wp-content/themes/dataclysm/img/buy-now.png)](#)

\
\

### About OkTrends

OkTrends is original research and insights from
[OkCupid](http://www.okcupid.com). We've compiled our observations and
statistics from hundreds of millions of OkCupid user interactions, all
to explore the data side of the online world.

follow Christian Rudder on Twitter:\
 [@christianrudder](https://twitter.com/christianrudder)

follow OkCupid on Twitter:\
 [@okcupid](https://twitter.com/okcupid)

-   [Favorites](#)
-   [All posts](#)

-   [Exactly What To Say In A First
    Message](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/online-dating-advice-exactly-what-to-say-in-a-first-message/ "Exactly What To Say In A First Message")
    2,354,707 views
-   [The 4 Big Myths of Profile
    Pictures](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-4-big-myths-of-profile-pictures/ "The 4 Big Myths of Profile Pictures")
    2,344,614 views
-   [Gay Sex vs. Straight
    Sex](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/gay-sex-vs-straight-sex/ "Gay Sex vs. Straight Sex")
    1,416,893 views
-   [Don’t Be Ugly By
    Accident!](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/dont-be-ugly-by-accident/ "Don’t Be Ugly By Accident!")
    1,269,836 views
-   [The REAL ‘Stuff White People
    Like’](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-real-stuff-white-people-like/ "The REAL ‘Stuff White People Like’")
    1,256,866 views
-   [10 Charts About
    Sex](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/10-charts-about-sex/ "10 Charts About Sex")
    1,219,914 views
-   [How Your Race Affects The Messages You
    Get](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/your-race-affects-whether-people-write-you-back/ "How Your Race Affects The Messages You Get")
    1,205,331 views
-   [The Best Questions For A First
    Date](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-best-questions-for-first-dates/ "The Best Questions For A First Date")
    1,153,939 views
-   [Your Looks and Your
    Inbox](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/your-looks-and-online-dating/ "Your Looks and Your Inbox")
    1,034,928 views
-   [The Case For An Older
    Woman](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-case-for-an-older-woman/ "The Case For An Older Woman")
    978,462 views

-   [Race and Attraction, 2009 -
    2014](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/)

    Sep 10, 2014 - Full

-   [We Experiment On Human
    Beings!](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/we-experiment-on-human-beings/)

    Jul 28, 2014 - Full

-   [The Best Questions For A First
    Date](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-best-questions-for-first-dates/)

    Apr 20, 2011 - Full

    In this post we analyze our entire database of match questions,
    looking for the ones that are easy and conversational, yet that
    correlate to the deeper, unspeakable, issues people actually care
    about. Love, sex, a soulmate, an argument: whatever you're looking
    for, we'll show you the shallow questions to find it.

-   [10 Charts About
    Sex](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/10-charts-about-sex/)

    Apr 19, 2011 - Full

    Well, it's just like it sounds. We: visualize ten surprising and/or
    weird sex trends. You: learn something and maybe get just a little
    turned on.

-   [The Mathematics Of
    Beauty](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-mathematics-of-beauty/)

    Jan 10, 2011 - Full

    Using real user photos plus a few celebrity examples, we examine
    female beauty and men's reactions to it. We found that simple
    statistics yields some very surprising insights. Being cute is bad.
    Ugly can sometimes be good. And, generally, the more men as a group
    disagree about a woman's looks, the more they like her.

-   [Gay Sex vs. Straight
    Sex](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/gay-sex-vs-straight-sex/)

    Oct 12, 2010 - Full

    Gay issues have been in the news a lot lately, from the debate over
    same-sex marriage in Congress to a sickening rash of gay-bashing
    here in New York City. We see a lot of emotion out there, instead of
    information, and we wanted to provide some data-based context on
    sexuality so that people might make better choices about what they
    say, think, and do. From our massive database, here's what we've
    found about all types of sex and relationships.

-   [The REAL 'Stuff White People
    Like'](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-real-stuff-white-people-like/)

    Sep 8, 2010 - Full

    What is it that makes a culture unique? What tastes, interests, and
    concepts define an ethnic group? How is the self-concept of, say, a
    black person different from that of a white or Asian person? These
    are big questions, and subject to a lot of speculation. We answered
    them with data.

-   [Don't Be Ugly By
    Accident!](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/dont-be-ugly-by-accident/)

    Aug 10, 2010 - Full

    We take a data-based approach the technical side of photography:
    flash, focus, aperture, etc. We feel like people don't think much
    about that stuff when they choose a profile photo, and yet, as we
    show, something as simple as using the flash can seriously mess you
    up.

-   [The Big Lies People Tell In Online
    Dating](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-biggest-lies-in-online-dating/)

    Jul 7, 2010 - Full

    The Internet is a great place to pretend to be someone you're not.
    Most of the time, self-misrepresentation's not a big deal, but in
    online dating, it is. In this post, we analyze the claims people
    make in their profiles and posit rules of thumb for getting at the
    truth behind the fudge.

-   [What Is \*Your\* Best Profile
    Picture](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/my-best-face/)

    May 6, 2010 - Full

    Announcing a new, possibly useful, tool to put your best face
    forward on your profile page.

-   [The Democrats Are Doomed, or How A 'Big Tent' Can Be Too
    Big](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-democrats-are-doomed-or-how-a-big-tent-can-be-too-big/)

    Mar 30, 2010 - Full

    A look at political views, age, and how it might not be a good thing
    that the Democrats have such a diverse constituency.

-   [The Case For An Older
    Woman](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-case-for-an-older-woman/)

    Feb 16, 2010 - Full

    As they age, men look for increasingly younger matches. The median
    31 year-old guy, for example, sets his allowable match age range
    from 22 to 35—nine years younger, but only four years older, than
    himself. This behavior leads to a ridiculous imbalance in the online
    dating world: most men send most of their messages to women barely
    out of their teens, while many perfectly good-looking and
    interesting women in their thirties and forties go unwritten. This
    article examines this phenomenon in detail.

-   [The 4 Big Myths of Profile
    Pictures](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/the-4-big-myths-of-profile-pictures/)

    Jan 20, 2010 - Full

    We go over user photographs with a fine-toothed comb and explode
    much of the common wisdom about "what makes a good picture."

-   [Your Looks and Your
    Inbox](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/your-looks-and-online-dating/)

    Nov 17, 2009 - Full

    In this post we will confront an unfortunate truth of online dating:
    no matter how much time you spend polishing your profile, honing
    your IM banter, and perfecting your message introductions, it's your
    picture that matters most.

-   [Mofo and Other
    Mysteries](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/mofo-and-other-mysteries/)

    Oct 26, 2009 - Full

-   [How Your Race Affects The Messages You
    Get](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/your-race-affects-whether-people-write-you-back/)

    Oct 5, 2009 - Full

-   [How Races and Religions Match in Online
    Dating](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/how-races-and-religions-match-in-online-dating/)

    Sep 29, 2009 - Full

-   [Exactly What To Say In A First
    Message](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/online-dating-advice-exactly-what-to-say-in-a-first-message/)

    Sep 14, 2009 - Full

-   [Online Dating Advice: Same-Sex
    Messaging](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/online-dating-messaging-advice-same-sex-charts/)

    Sep 10, 2009 - Full

-   [Online Dating Advice: Optimum Message
    Length](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/how-to-get-people-to-reply-to-your-messages-in-online-dating-part-i/)

    Sep 3, 2009 - Full

-   [Death, Freedom, and Cold
    Winters](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/sweet-ass-american-trends/)

    Jul 13, 2009 - Full

-   [Flowchart to My
    Heart](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/flowchart-to-my-heart/)

    Jul 7, 2009 - Full

    In which we reduce a person's dating-decision process to a nifty
    series of lines and polygons.

-   [Rape Fantasies and Hygiene By
    State](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/rape-fantasies-and-hygiene-by-state/)

    Jun 25, 2009 - Full

    Our first post, in which we establish our excellent theme of
    provocative data analysis, via a variety of controversial subjects.

-   [About OkTrends](http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/about/)

    Jun 5, 2009 - Micro

### Share this article

[Tweet](http://twitter.com/share)

[](http://www.okcupid.com/signup?cf=blog)

we do math to get you dates

check it out

OkTrends. Send it to your friends. Race and Attraction, 2009 – 2014

© 2014 Humor Rainbow, Inc. \
Patent Pending, pending.

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=7134314&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cj=1)

![image](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/1034608743/?value=0&label=lb30CJvskQQQ58Cr7QM&guid=ON&script=0)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/race-attraction-2009-2014/
