[Visit Aeon Film](http://aeon.co/film)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Follow us [](https://twitter.com/#!/aeonmag)
[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)

Daily or Weekly

-   Search
-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about)
-   [Film](http://aeon.co/film)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon Magazine")

Daily Weekly

Newsletter

[](https://twitter.com/aeonmag)
[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)

-   [World Views](http://aeon.co/magazine/world-views/ "World Views")
-   [Nature &
    Cosmos](http://aeon.co/magazine/nature-and-cosmos/ "Nature and Cosmos")
-   [Being Human](http://aeon.co/magazine/being-human/ "Being Human")
-   [Living
    Together](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/ "Living Together")
-   [Altered
    States](http://aeon.co/magazine/altered-states/ "Altered States")

The intimacy of crowds
======================

Crowds aren’t really crazed – they are made of highly co-operative
individuals driven to shared interests and goals

by [Michael
Bond](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/michael-bond/ "Read more articles by Michael Bond")
2,000 words

-   Read later or Kindle
    -   -   -   -   ![image](https://d1xnn692s7u6t6.cloudfront.net/white-15.png)Kindle

![People make their way amid debris near the World Trade Center in New
York Tuesday Sept. 11, 2001. Photo by Gulnara
Samoilova/AP/PA](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2014/05/WTC.jpg)

People make their way amid debris near the World Trade Center in New
York Tuesday Sept. 11, 2001. *Photo by Gulnara Samoilova/AP/PA*

[Michael
Bond](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/michael-bond/ "Read more articles by Michael Bond")
is a journalist who writes about psychology and behaviour for
publications such as *New Scientist*, *Nature*, and *Prospect*, among
others. His book, *The Power of Others*, was published on 1 May. He
lives in London.

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/crowds-show-us-working-together-at-our-best/#comments)

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/crowds-show-us-working-together-at-our-best/#comments)

There’s nothing like a riot to bring out the amateur psychologist in all
of us. Consider what happened in August 2011, after police killed Mark
Duggan, a 29-year-old man from the London suburb of Tottenham. Thousands
took to the streets of London and other English towns in the UK’s worst
outbreak of civil unrest in a generation. When police finally restored
order after some six days of violence and vandalism, everyone from the
Prime Minister David Cameron to newspaper columnists of every political
persuasion denounced the mindless madness, incredulous that a single
killing, horrific as it was, could spark the conflagration at hand. The
most popular theory was that rioters had surrendered their
self-awareness and rationality to the mentality of the crowd.

This has been the overriding view of crowd behaviour since the French
Revolution and the storming of the Bastille. The 19th-century French
criminologist Gabriel Tarde likened even the most civilised of crowds to
‘a monstrous worm whose sensibility is diffuse and who still acts with
disordered movements according to the dictates of its head’. Tarde’s
contemporary, the social psychologist Gustave Le Bon, tried to explain
crowd behaviour as a paralysis of the brain; hypnotised by the group,
the individual becomes the slave of unconscious impulses. ‘He is no
longer himself, but has become an automaton who has ceased to be guided
by his will,’ he wrote in 1895. ‘Isolated, he may be a cultivated
individual; in a crowd, he is a barbarian… a grain of sand amid other
grains of sand, which the wind stirs up at will.’

This is still the prevailing view of mob behaviour, but it turns out to
be wrong. In recent years, social psychologists have found that, rather
than surrendering rationality and self-awareness, people in crowds
define themselves according to who they are with at the time; their
social identity determines how they behave.

Stephen Reicher, a social psychologist at the University of St Andrews,
says this model of crowd behaviour fits every case of public disorder in
the past three decades where data have been collected. It also squares
with the most thorough investigation of urban unrest ever conducted: the
Kerner Commission report into the urban race riots in Los Angeles,
Chicago, Newark, and other US cities between 1965 and 1967. Perhaps the
most serious of these took place in Detroit in July 1967 after police
raided an unlicensed bar and hundreds of patrons and local residents
gathered in the street to protest. After more than four days of violence
between the crowd and law enforcement, there were 43 people dead, 1,189
people injured, and more than 2,000 buildings destroyed.

The Kerner report concluded that the key factor behind the unrest – the
worst in US history since the Civil War – was widespread deprivation
within black communities. It noted that black people were twice as
likely as whites to be unemployed, and almost four times as likely to be
living in poverty. The report also pointed out that the typical rioter
was better educated than the average person in their communities, more
socially integrated and less likely to have a previous criminal record.
‘What the rioters appeared to be seeking was fuller participation in the
social order and the material benefits enjoyed by the majority of
American citizens,’ it concluded. ‘Rather than rejecting the American
system, they were anxious to obtain a place for themselves in it.’

This sits neatly with Reicher’s theory, which holds that people in
crowds behave not with mindlessness or madness, but by co-operating with
those around them. They do not lose their heads but instead act with
full rational intent. In London, many (though not all) of the rioters
were motivated by a shared sense of grievance at how their communities
had been treated by police in the preceding months and years, in
particular the frequency with which young black men were being stopped
and searched by police in the street for no good reason. When the riot
started, many individuals felt that, as members of a dissatisfied group,
they had a legitimate cause to join in.

Surprisingly, the model also explains why crowds in emergency situations
are *disinclined* to panic, putting them at higher risk. When the
hijacked planes hit the World Trade Center towers in New York on 11
September 2001, most of those inside procrastinated rather than heading
for the nearest exit. Even those who managed to escape waited an average
of six minutes before moving to the stairs. Some hung around for half an
hour, awaiting more information, collecting things to take with them,
going to the bathroom, finishing emails, or making phone calls.

Likewise, say researchers, passengers have died in accidents because
they just didn’t try to get out. Take the aircraft fire at Manchester
airport in the UK on 22 August 1985, when 55 people died because they
stayed in their seats amid the flames. John Leach, who studies disaster
psychology at the University of Oslo, says a shared state of
bewilderment might be to blame. Contrary to popular belief that crowds
always panic in emergencies, large groups mill around longer than small
groups since it takes them more time to come up with a plan.

The new understanding of crowd dynamics has helped authorities in Europe
rewrite the rules on crowd management. In emergencies, individuals are
encouraged to avoid the allure of complacency and think of an escape
plan. Likewise, many police forces are trained to adopt a more
sensitive, communicative approach to large crowds. If crowd behaviour
stems from the social norms of the majority rather than the actions of
the criminal few, then sending in the riot squad is likely to make
things worse, because it treats everyone as aggressors. Presumed
aggressors will probably respond in kind, and violence can spiral out.

These changes have been motivated largely by Clifford Stott, a
researcher at the University of Leeds. Stott has done most of his work
by embedding with crowds – especially with England football fans at away
games – and recording what they do. He has been present, Dictaphone in
pocket, at some of the most significant episodes of football violence
involving England fans in Europe, including the World Cup finals in
Italy in 1990 and France in 1998. He has little doubt that most football
violence is best understood in terms of broad group identities rather
than mindless minions following a hooligan minority. At the tournaments
in Italy and France, for example, the vast majority of England fans were
peaceful at the start, but together changed their tune when they began
to feel that local police were targeting England supporters in
particular. By the same token, Scottish football fans rarely got into
trouble despite drinking heavily, since non-violence has become part of
their identity. By avoiding conflict, Scotland fans help differentiate
themselves from England fans, and even punish those within their ranks
who get aggressive.

Stott and his collaborators presented their research to the Portuguese
Public Security Police (PSP) before the European football championships,
scheduled for Portugal for the first time in 2004. They advised the PSP
to drop the riot-squad tactics used at most previous tournaments in
favour of a lower-profile, firm-but-friendly approach. The Portuguese
were receptive. They developed a training programme to ensure that all
PSP officers understood the theory and how to translate it into
non-confrontational policing. The result was an almost complete absence
of disorder at England games during Euro 2004.

> In the dark tunnels, where hundreds were trapped with no way of
> knowing if they would be rescued, there was little panic ****

Today, the social identity model of crowd behaviour is the framework by
which all Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) matches in
Europe are policed – though in Russia and in eastern Europe it is still
only sporadically applied. Stott is now working to take the model beyond
football. In 2009, Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC),
the UK’s independent police inspectorate, asked him to write a report on
applying crowd psychology to public policing. HMIC adopted many of his
recommendations, and one outcome has been the creation of liaison units
in London and elsewhere that send officers in distinctive uniforms into
protest crowds to establish contact – not, as some activists suspect, to
spy on them. Despite the credibility problems suffered by London police
in the wake of the 2011 riots, liaison officers were used successfully
around 50 times during the London 2012 Olympic Games.

Years of field research have taught Stott, Reicher and other social
psychologists not only that mindless irrationality is rare within
crowds, but also that co-operation and altruism are the norm when lives
are at stake. When Islamic extremists detonated four bombs on London’s
transport system during the morning rush hour on 7 July 2005, killing 52
people and injuring more than 770, there emerged many remarkable stories
of helpful behaviour amid the carnage and chaos. In the dark,
soot-filled underground tunnels, where hundreds were trapped with no way
of knowing if they would be rescued, there was little panic and a
general sense that ‘we’re all in the same boat together’, as one
survivor put it.

At the University of Sussex, researchers led by the social psychologist
John Drury have coined the term ‘collective resilience’, an attitude of
mutual helping and unity in the midst of danger, to describe how crowds
under duress often behave. There are many documented examples of this.
In 2008, Drury’s team interviewed survivors of 11 tragedies from the
previous 40 years, including the 1989 Hillsborough football stadium
disaster when 96 Liverpool supporters died after being trapped in
overcrowded pens, and the IRA bombing that killed six outside Harrods in
London in 1983. In each case, most of Drury’s interviewees recalled
feeling a strong sense of togetherness during the crisis, and an
inclination to help strangers. Without such co-operation, the casualty
rates could have been far higher, says Drury, who refers to crowds as
‘the fourth emergency service’ – an attitude not often shared by police.
In Drury’s view, it is wrong-headed to blame crowd disasters on the
behaviour of the crowd. More often the real problem is poor organisation
– too many people in one place – or inadequate venue design.

Drury explains that a crisis, even a minor one such as a train breaking
down in a tunnel, creates a ‘psychological crowd’ out of what was
previously an aggregate of strangers. You suddenly share a common fate
and your sphere of interest ramps up from the personal to the group.

‘I think everyone would accept that one had really gone beyond the
definition of identifying the person as a supporter of football,’ said a
survivor of the Hillsborough tragedy. ‘I don’t think anyone saw
Liverpool fans and Notts Forest fans… People stopped being supporters of
a football team and were just people.’

This sense of communion and barriers being broken down is one of the
most widely reported crowd experiences. Psychological crowds are often
fulfilling and uplifting places to be. Interviewing people after the
Egyptian revolution in 2011, I often heard participants say that the
days they spent protesting in Cairo’s Tahrir Square were the best of
times. ‘The revolution was the greatest event I will live through in my
life,’ the science journalist Mohammed Yahia told me. ‘It was a piece of
paradise,’ said Basem Fathy, one of the youth organisers who helped
coordinate the early protests. ‘No one thought whether you were
Christian or Muslim, poor or rich.’

The Cairo-based journalist Ursula Lindsey remembers it like this: ‘Once
you saw that crowd, you just felt the tide was on your side. You felt so
right. It made people feel fantastic. People were high on it, seeing
they were part of such a big group. It was an endless, mind-opening,
affirming experience. You saw the evaporation of fear, this elation,
because so many people were with you. Those 18 days brought out the best
in people. People gave the best versions of themselves.’

The idea that in crowds we might give the best versions of ourselves
runs counter to the common view that has prevailed since the French
Revolution. Yet it has science on its side: from the cohesion of
football crowds to the altruism of disaster victims and the solidarity
of revolutionaries, the evidence for the sanity and intimacy of crowds
has become overwhelming.

*15 May 2014*

[](#top)

*Read more essays on [Crime](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/crime/),
[Psychology](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/psychology/) and
[Society](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/society/)*

Comments

-   http://thewayitis.info/ Derek Roche

    Still, the kids who survived the recent Korean ferry disaster were
    those who ignored the PA instructions to stay put, thought for
    themselves and escaped. Those who preferred the intimacy and
    compassion of crowds all drowned. Where's the sanity in that?

    -   jim

        Conditioning had its way

-   Babgess

    What about the bystander effect? Seems like this argument is
    forgetting this fact.

    -   http://www.CrowdLeader.co.uk/ CrowdLeader

        The bystander effect seems to look at isolated individuals, and
        not crowds or groups with a shared sense of identity. It is this
        shared identity that leads to the altruistic and supportive
        behaviour.\
         You may also say, what about deindividuation theory, but
        research has actually demonstrated that this leads to more
        supportive behaviour, not less.

-   Delius

    "In recent years, social psychologists have found that, rather than\
     surrendering rationality and self-awareness, people in crowds
    define\
     themselves according to who they are with at the time"

    I'm having trouble grokking how these are different. No one has ever
    said that people in a crowd will suddenly start acting crazy, as in
    doing random things. But if someone next to you does something
    crazy, it makes it more likely you will, as well. That is STILL
    abandoning rationality.

    -   Jones

        I think what he means is, the subject, will rationally chose to
        act with what he/she is wanting or thinking. The person acts of
        their own accord, they don't carry out an action they wouldn't
        otherwise do as an individual.

    -   http://www.CrowdLeader.co.uk/ CrowdLeader

        Delius, it is not "abandoning rationality" but conforming to the
        social exceptions of the group, so long as you identify and have
        a 'shared identity' with the group.

        take for example a protest crowd in the UK, specifically the
        example of Ian Tomlinson
        ([http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death\_of\_Ian\_Tomlinson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_of_Ian_Tomlinson)),
        those like Ian, who were previously nothing more than bystander,
        then after witnessing the illegitimate brutality of the police,
        suddenly have a strong shared identity with those protesting
        against the police and are then more likely to act physical
        action against the police.

        Conversely if you got lost and ended up at an English Defence
        League (a racist group) protest and saw them being attacked by
        the Police, most people would not join in, as they have no
        shared identity, so despite being in a crowd they will not
        simply act irrationally.

        One final example of how quickly the boundaries that define your
        social group (and your potential influence from it) is during
        the 2010 student protests when a fire extinguisher is dropped of
        Millbank Tower. In under 60 seconds the dynamics of the group
        change as the result of one persons action
        [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAGNJMQD1rA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAGNJMQD1rA)

-   Sarah

    For anyone interested in another journalist's perspective on crowd
    theory, I highly recommend "Among the Thugs," Bill Buford's account
    of English football violence. Great article!

-   Brad

    Destructive crowd behavior seems to be innate tribalism at its most
    intense, a welcome reversion to our beastly origins. There appears
    to be little difference in such behavior and that of domesticated
    dogs that, when allowed to form a pack, revert to their innate feral
    nature.

-   http://www.livinginthehereandnow.co.za/ beachcomber

    ‘What the rioters appeared to be seeking was fuller participation in
    the social order and the material benefits enjoyed by the majority
    of American citizens,’ it concluded. ‘Rather than rejecting the
    American system, they were anxious to obtain a place for themselves
    in it.’ Substitute South African for American and you have the
    precise situation occurring on a daily basis in the townships here,
    which (because of inadequate police training) results in many
    deaths; the most tragic being the Marikana mine worker shootings.
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marikana\_miners'\_strike](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marikana_miners'_strike)

    “Surprisingly, the model also explains why crowds in emergency
    situations are disinclined to panic,” Surely this would only be in
    selected situations?

    [http://www.crowdsafe.com/fruincauses.pdf](http://www.crowdsafe.com/fruincauses.pdf)
    Gives an overview of current practice.

    -   http://www.CrowdLeader.co.uk/ CrowdLeader

        Hello Beachcomber, interesting to hear that similar things are
        going on in South Africa at the moment, as for an "overview of
        current practice" you may also want to check out the UK Cabinet
        Office publication 2009 "Understanding Crowd Behaviour".

        Saying that it is more comprehensive is a bit of an
        understatement, but it is very well structured so you can easily
        find the information you need.

        [https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/understanding-crowd-behaviours-documents](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/understanding-crowd-behaviours-documents)

-   john

    Prevaricate does not mean what you think it means.

-   http://www.CrowdLeader.co.uk/ CrowdLeader

    Great article. Institutional change is a slow mover, but things are
    getting there. I'm currently doing my own research looking at
    relationship between crowds and security at music festivals. The aim
    is to encourage crowds to think that security are part of the same
    social group at festivals, as well as using crowd led encouragement
    to promote supportive behaviours, hence CrowdLeader

-   Smegy

    Hey, this is a great article, with many insights into crowd
    psychology.\
     However, I think it's missing a point. Those people who huddle
    together in dark tunnels knew that there was a whole world trying to
    save them (successfully or not).\
     But in the event of a bigger catastrophe, like a major earthquake
    (or hurricane katrina), if you think that no one is coming to save
    you, I doubt that everyone in a group would act with a sense of
    communion. Especially when resources are very limited. Any thoughts.
    anyone?

[![A picnic is held on the streets in the centre of Brussels to 'reclaim
the streets and the public place', 9th June 2013. Photo by Kevin Van den
Panhuyzen
/Demotix/PA](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/07/Reclaim-the-Streets-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/cities-thrive-when-public-space-is-really-public/)

Cities belong to us

Reclaiming the streets through civic participation does more than change
the city: it creates citizens

By Leo Hollis 2,700 words

[![Julia Butterfly Hill spent 738 days living in a 55m California
Redwood tree in a successful attempt to prevent the clearing of
surrounding forest. Photo by Eric
Slomanson](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/05/Up-on-the-tree-1-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/nature-and-cosmos/sarah-pike-radical-environmentalists/)

Uprooted

Environmental activists have been jailed, persecuted and spied on. What
fuels such an absolute commitment to a cause?

By Sarah Pike 3,600 words

[![Luc gives Tonnin Smit a kiss at their home in Geel, Belgium. It is
traditional in the town for families like the Smits to take in people
who suffer from mental illness. Photo by Gary Porter for the Milwaukee
Journal
Sentinel](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/12/Geel-by-Gary-Porter-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/the-town-where-the-mentally-ill-get-a-warm-welcome/)

The Geel question

For centuries, a little Belgian town has treated the mentally ill. Why
are its medieval methods so successful?

By Mike Jay 2,800 words

![FIRST-TIME-FINAL](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/FIRST-TIME-FINAL.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/featured/never-like-first-time-a-short-film-about-virginity-lost/)

Never Like the First Time!
==========================

Virginity lost, perspective gained – four stories of formative sexual experiences
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jonas Odell

15 minutes

![METROPOLIS-2-FINAL](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/METROPOLIS-2-FINAL.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/featured/metropolis-ii-a-short-film-about-the-city-of-tomorrow/)

Metropolis II
=============

The city of tomorrow is here today – and it’s fast, efficient and in the studio of US artist Chris Burden
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Henry Joost, Ariel Schulman

6 minutes

More films

[](#)

### Like us on Facebook

[](https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=aeonmag)

### Follow us on Twitter

[](#email-signup)

### Sign up to our newsletter

[Newsletter](#email-signup)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Share

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine/ "Aeon Magazine")

-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about/ "About Aeon")
-   [Our writers](http://aeon.co/magazine/contributors/ "Our writers")
-   [Most popular](http://aeon.co/magazine/most-popular/ "Most Popular")
-   [Aeon Film](http://aeon.co/film "Aeon Film")

© Aeon Media Ltd. 2014 Designed by
[magCulture](http://magculture.com/projects/ "magCulture")
[Privacy](http://aeon.co/magazine/privacy-policy/ "Privacy policy")

Sign up for our Daily or Weekly newsletter

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/crowds-show-us-working-together-at-our-best/
