John Cochrane's blog

Sunday, February 9, 2014
------------------------

### Mooconomics

An [Economist
article](http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21595901-rise-online-instruction-will-upend-economics-higher-education-massive)
and Alex Tabarrok in a [Marginal
Revolution](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2014/02/the-economics-of-online-education.html)
blog post weigh in on the future and economic structure of moocs
(massively open online classes).\
 \
 A few thoughts on this question, based on my experience teaching a
[Coursera mooc](https://class.coursera.org/assetpricing-001) last fall.
(This was supposed to be a short post, and grew out of control. Oh
well.)\
 \
 Yes, moocs potentially upend the fundamental economic structure of
teaching. Teaching had been a high marginal cost business. Moocs are a
nearly zero marginal cost business. \
 \
 But.. For now, Moocs are a quite high fixed-cost business. Putting a
class up in a mooc is not quite as much work as writing a textbook, but
it's nowhere near as easy as teaching a new class. If you're tempted,
beware! Preparing, taping, editing and uploading a lecture is not the
same as walking in, telling a few jokes, and getting through the week.
Fixing anything that went wrong or updating is costly too.\
 \
 Part of the high fixed costs lie in the limitations of the software.
This is still version 1.0 stuff. Quizzes and assessments are key to the
success of a class, and these are still particularly rudimentary. On
Coursera, really, not much more than multiple choice and numerical entry
works well. Coursera software does not allow parts to questions, or
students to try question 1, get a hint, solve it, see the answer, and
then go on to question 2 which builds on question 1. You can't even cut
and paste pictures. As an instructor, taking those "prove x theorem" or
"how do you resolve y puzzle" problems and turning them into meaningful
multiple choice or numeric entry questions is the hardest part.
Artificial intelligence programs reading text entries, guiding the
student to different material based on his misunderstandings, and so
on... this is all personal flying jet packs dreams.\
 \
 The difficulty of using the software and its capabilities should get
better. Version 1.0 turns to version 2.0 (And then becomes bloatware,
and we all switch to a new platform and recode everything...) But if you
prepare a mooc, do not dream that you are putting it in stone for
generations. You're an early adopter, and you're going to be updating
and redoing it for better and different software for a long time, paying
fixed costs year after year.\
 \
 Don't dream of doing a mooc on your own. You need video and IT help.
Most of all, you need pedagogical help, people who keep up with the
fast-evolving art of how to successfully port classes on moocs. I had
that help at the University of Chicago, and it saved me from horrible
beginner blunders. Example: I wanted to tape my live classes. No, Emily,
who was in charge of my class, insisted that we do it months ahead of
time in 5-8 minute segments. This little tip alone saved me from what
the Financial Times labeled, in its [review of Wharton's
moocs](http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/2bfeed6a%E2%80%90%205cf0%E2%80%9011e3%E2%80%90a558%E2%80%9000144feabdc0.html),
"the death march of moocs," so boring you will have "blood pouring out
of your eyes" -- and the necessity to do it all over again right.\
 \
 High and continuing fixed costs has economic and strategic lessons.
University administrators hot to "go online," who figure they'll just
get a few volunteers to throw their popular classes at the internet need
to face the fact that creating high quality online classes is going to
cost real money -- money for IT, video, and mooc specialist support
staff; and most of all faculty, who are not going to do this for free.\
 \
 Yet, for the moment, the market price is "free." That leads to a bit of
conundrum -- big expensive ongoing fixed costs to produce something that
we give away? How will we "monetize" it? What will the economic model
be, and how will moocs change the higher education market?\
 \
 The grumpy response to moocs: When Gutenberg invented moveable type,
universities reacted in horror. "They'll just read the textbook. Nobody
will come to lectures anymore!" It didn't happen. Why should we worry
now?\
 \
 As Alex pointed out, there is a good analogy between textbook
publishing and mooc creation -- high fixed, low marginal cost (now zero
for textbooks too). It leads to superstars with established brand names
taking over the market, and Alex speculated that publishers will know
how to recover costs.\
 \
 A lot of mooc is, in fact, a modern textbook -- because the twitter
generation does not read. Forcing my campus students to watch the
lecture videos and answer some simple quiz questions, covering the basic
expository material, before coming to class -- all checked and graded
electronically -- worked wonders to produce well prepared students and a
brilliant level of discussion. Several students commented that the video
lectures were better than the real thing, because they could stop and
rewind as necessary. The "flipped classroom" model works.\
 \
 The "flipped classroom" component will, I think, will be a very
important use for online tools in business education especially. Our
classes are infrequent -- once a week for three hours at best. Our
international program meets twice for 5 days in a row, three hours per
day. We also offer intensive 1-3 day custom programs. An experience
consisting of a strong online component, in which students work a little
bit each day over a long period, mixed with online connection through
forums, videos, chats, etc., all as background for classroom interaction
-- which also cements relationships formed online -- can be a big
improvement on what we do now.\
 \
 There is a lot of worry about moocs substituting for campus experience.
At top universities, at least, that seems unlikely to me. The online
version is the foundation for the campus version. Well done, the campus
class gets a layer of depth, practice in application, additional
material, that the mooc cannot offer.\

\

But a warning to faculty: Teaching the flipped classroom is a lot
harder! The old model, we pretend to teach, you pretend to learn,
filling the board with equations or droning on for an hour and a half,
is really easy compared to guiding a good discussion or working on some
problems together.\
 \
 This thought suggests another model. Better pedagogy will demand online
components to standard teaching, and that will demand the fixed costs be
incurred -- or bought from someone else. Once online, the zero marginal
cost principle means it's costless to open it to the rest of the world.\

\

So, what does the classroom experience, on campus, in a degree-granting
institution, produce that "read the textbook" does not produce -- and
were on that spectrum will the mooc lie?\
 \
 - Social interaction, and commitment. An early lesson of online
learning is the huge dropout rate -- about the same as "I'll just read
the book." When the class has a "session," online forums, a sense of
community and interaction, people keep going. \
 \
 The importance of the social component was, to me, another lesson of my
mooc. But the social media part of moocs are also in their infancy. We
used Coursera's forums, and Google hangouts. (Another kludge, not really
ready for this use.) The next round of mooc software and its usage has
to really develop the social media and interaction component, above the
video lecture and multiple choice quiz component.\
 \
 - How to do it wrong. Most of my skill as a classroom teacher comes
from the fact that I know most of the wrong answers as well as the right
ones. When students mistake expected return for actual return,
foreknowledge for probability distribution, variance for downside risk,
I can spot that quickly. \
 \
 - Application. Real knowledge come from being able to use and apply
ideas. Multiple choice tests can't really push you there.\
 \
 On these dimensions, online is about halfway. The forums, google chats,
and growing community between students are not as good as a high quality
classroom experience. They are much better than a mediocre class at a
university in the middle of nowhere.\
 \
 What kinds of classes work well online? Surely, the kinds where "read
the book" worked are the easiest, where the material at hand is clear
and settled, and teaching has moved to the realm of pedagogical
knowledge. Introductory math or science classes strike me as good
examples, as well as practical classes -- how to pass your pilots'
license written test. In these classes, not only is "how to do it right"
quite settled, but there is a codified knowledge about all the ways to
do it wrong, that can be probed with multiple choice testing.\
 \
 Many Coursera classes seem to appeal to an "adult education" market
wanting fairly simple introductory courses. There, snazzy lectures are
important, and my struggles with machine-gradeable quizzes less so.\
 \
 About 4000 people watched my videos all the way through, and about 300
did all the work -- reporting about 16 hours a week on average. In the
current market, there is a strong demand for the former sort of "taste"
class, and less demand for a do-all-the-work PhD class. I'm still pretty
amazed that 300 people turned out for the latter, but as I revise the
course I'll make the "taste" version more accessible. People who work
cannot take 16 hours a week to do problems. It seems pretty clear that,
absent a big push to bundle moocs into something representing a degree,
they have to be broken down to smaller chunks.\
 \
 Moving up the scale, there is (I hope) a reason for the existence of a
research university, that there is an important externality between
teaching and research. Researchers benefit from having to sift through,
clarify, and simplify new ideas. Students benefit, in that people who
are actively doing research really understand the last 40 -50 years of
knowledge accumulation and teach it a lot better. Even the introductory
finance classes at Booth are taught well past the available textbooks,
reflecting a revised understanding of such basics as what the CAPM and
portfolio theory are as well as the subtleties of more recent research.
High school classes do not need researchers, they need pedagogical
experts.\
 \
 Here, the role of the online class seems murkier, and it will be
interesting to see if they can move past the introductory classes which
now dominate. For faculty, the low cost of innovating a class, and
updating class materials -- at least compared to putting it online or
writing a textbook -- is key. Better software that lowers these costs is
going to be vital. For students, though, the interaction, the thinking
through puzzles and wrong ways of doing things, are more important.\
 \
 On the other hand, moocs may be a boon to specialization. Already, I
received a few inquiries from faculty at other institutions who wanted
to use my mooc as part of their program. They have small PhD programs,
or don't have faculty in my area, so they can't staff a full class on
asset pricing theory. So, use my mooc; guided by a TA or faculty member
who isn't expert in the area, and isn't paid a full teaching credit. So
much knowledge is so specialized, and no university can host an expert
in anything. There has been some bemoaning the "economics of superstar
teachers" that moocs may create. For freshman physics, maybe. But if
there is one world superstar in, say, second century sanskrit poetry,
(I'm making this up), now every university in the world can offer a
class in second-century sanskrit poetry.\

\

However, no question about it, the deadly boring hour and a half lecture
in a hall with 100 people by a mediocre professor teaching utterly
standard material is just dead, RIP. And universities and classes which
offer nothing more to their campus students will indeed be pressed.\
 \
 Moocs represent one of the few places in which people are actually
studying pedagogy at universities, and trying to improve it. Technology
facilitates data collection. Unless you're in the business, you would be
very surprised to learn that college professors receive essentially no
training in how to teach, no supervision of their classroom activities,
and little feedback beyond a numerical rating at the end of the quarter.
Though we are data-oriented empirical social scientists in our research
lives, we do essentially no measurement or study of teaching
effectiveness. The data collection and analysis that moocs provide may
change that. Also, the presence (and necessity!) of a mooc staff means
there are people whose job it is to keep up with those pedagogical
lessons.\
 \
 All this is in its infancy. As with all else mooc, the hype is well
beyond the reality. Coursera only hosts simple analytics. For anything
else, you just get a huge unsorted csv file. But the potential is
there.\
 \
 *Business model.*\
 \
 So now, back to who pays and how do we pay the large fixed costs for
all this zero marginal cost free stuff.\
 \
 Universities offer more than classes. They offer student selection,
curriculum structure, branding, community, and certification. Business
schools are often accused that that's all we do! Important social
connections form at schools, and schools form powerful alumni networks.
Schools have job placement departments.\
 \
 There are thousands of mooc classes out there. There is certainly room
for an institution that has searched for the good ones, and says "we
offer a degree if you make it through mooc x y and z." If the university
offers guided study groups, all the better. Universities are loath to
offer real course credit for moocs. So there still is a business model
much like the textbook model: universities charge students for degrees.
And moocs can charge universities for use of their materials in this
case, while allowing them free otherwise. This just extends the model
many places have, that course materials are freely available. (MIT was a
pioneer here. All my class materials are available too,
[here](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/teaching/index.htm).)\
 \
 Another model: Some bands put their music on the internet for free,
which raises their concert revenue. Most universities are deadly serious
about "brand" and "global presence." They are hungry to turn alumni and
friends into a "community" of supporters, and develop "lifelong"
interactions. If an alum is looking for a job, or trying to land a
contract, it is awfully nice if the potential employer or partner says
"you went to Chicago? Wow you must be smart." Look at the glossy
magazines that come in your mail, or the Booth school's excellent
[Capital Ideas](http://www.chicagobooth.edu/capideas/), [University of
Chicago News](http://news.uchicago.edu/) or our Centers in
[Beijing](http://www.uchicago.edu/research/center/center_in_beijing/)
[Delhi](http://www.uchicago.edu/research/center/center_in_delhi) and
[Paris](http://www.uchicago.edu/research/center/center_in_paris) or the
Alumni and Development budget at any university. This stuff costs real
money. And it's a star system. There is only room for a few names at the
top. \
 \
 In this race, distinctive high quality online classes could be an
effective tool. Instead of reading a magazine article or website about
"all the great stuff going on at Chicago," imagine if ten thousand
people a year take distinctive well-branded Chicago online classes.
Imagine further that they meet "real" students and become part of the
"community." That could be a potent tool in this race, and worth the
costs involved.\
 \
 Our business school has for a long time wanted to connect with alumni
-- and have alumni connect with each other -- on an intellectual level,
not just gee-whiz, hire our students, give us money. Online versions of
the distinctive and new classes can do that.\
 \
 In my exit survey, I asked how taking this class changed the students'
perceptions of the University of Chicago or the Booth school. About half
said their impression was improved, and about half said no change
because they already have a good impression.\
 \
 In sum, one "model" that may work is that online classes, expensive
though they are to produce, are simply one of the many fixed costs that
universities anxious for widespread "brand recognition" must undertake,
without direct "monetization," just as they hire star research faculty.\
 \
 This vision dictates a different approach however. For the moment most
online classes have been simplified versions of introductory classes.
Introductory classes are a dime a dozen, and not "distinctive" or "brand
promoting." That objective will have to lead to universities putting
their most distinctive, high-level, and popular classes online.\
 \
 Already, the top universities have given up on language instruction
online. This is a great example of a field that makes a lot of sense
online, but in which expertise in pedagogy is more important than
research expertise in the subject matter.\
 \
 This "community" thing is interesting. I saw quite a few students form
connections through the forum on my class. A group of students came from
a skype group from all over the world that takes online classes
together. Alas, the social network that formed on the class focus group
disappeared with the class. Message to administrators, you want to keep
these communities alive.\
 \
 The marketing, branding, and selection thing goes both ways. Simply
posting a class on Coursera, you attract the sort of people who are
browsing Coursera classes. They fit the typical "adult education" model
well. Of 37000 who might browse a course in asset pricing, not many make
it through the first lecture, "review of stochastic calculus." You want
to connect to the people who might be interested in the class, who maybe
aren't taking a lot of online classes already. Direct marketing,
communication, using the network of engaged alumni or other university
or brand specific networks will emerge as being important, rather than
pooling every student in the world, every class in the world, in one big
bazaar. Similarly, measuring success in this model has to go past the
seduction of click counts. You have to identify a target audience and
see if you're connecting with them.\

\

Those of us in business schools tend to be revenue-minded. We should
remember that the rest of the university does not really live off
tuition revenues. Universities are often described as a hedge fund that
offers some classes, or in some cases a football team. There is some
truth to this. We don't try to "monetize" every single one of our
research efforts. In fact, the investments that top universities make in
research, labs, and super star professors, who give away the fruit of
that research in academic journals, far exceeds conceivable investments
in online efforts. We are, in the end, nonprofit institutions that give
away what used to be called knowledge and is now called intellectual
property.\
 \
 In sum, I see two possible paths this could take. Moocs could become
snazzy textbooks, "monetized" by textbook companies. Or they could
become a central way universities establish a presence beyond local
campus walls, generating the "superstar" market. Or, perhaps, a bit of
both.\
 \
 *Update:*The Economist [Free Exchange
blog](http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2014/02/online-education)
though not free offers some interesting thoughts, especially on the
survival of second-tier universities. It's still underrating the social
component though, I think. Otherwise reading the textbook and taking a
standardized test would have already displaced those universities.

Posted by [John H.
Cochrane](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04842601651429471525 "author profile")
at [9:15
PM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/mooconomics.html "permanent link")
[![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/icon18_edit_allbkg.gif)](http://www.blogger.com/post-edit.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8774880701011197831&from=pencil "Edit Post")

[Email
This](http://www.blogger.com/share-post.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8774880701011197831&target=email "Email This")[BlogThis!](http://www.blogger.com/share-post.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8774880701011197831&target=blog "BlogThis!")[Share
to
Twitter](http://www.blogger.com/share-post.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8774880701011197831&target=twitter "Share to Twitter")[Share
to
Facebook](http://www.blogger.com/share-post.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8774880701011197831&target=facebook "Share to Facebook")[Share
to
Pinterest](http://www.blogger.com/share-post.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8774880701011197831&target=pinterest "Share to Pinterest")

Labels:
[Economists](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Economists),
[Teaching](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Teaching)

#### 10 comments:

1.  ![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/anon36.png)

    Angus[February 10, 2014 at 5:24
    AM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392031449581#c6710248300541732200)

    Professor Cochrane, as a recent graduate(?) of your coursera course,
    I feel I might actually be qualified to comment (rare!).\
    \
    First: 'There is certainly room for an institution that has searched
    for the good ones, and says "we offer a degree if you make it
    through mooc x y and z."' Coursera is now offering paid
    'specialisations'. It's not quite the same as a degree, granted. But
    its perhaps somewhere between the current Statement of
    Accomplishment and a degree. That said, it doesn't appeal to me at
    all.\
    \
    'Several students commented that the video lectures were better than
    the real thing, because they could stop and rewind as necessary.' I
    agree! I listened to the lectures on my run into work as a first
    pass - a get-the-idea-of-where-this-is-going listen - and then I
    would sit down and watch (and note) the lectures over
    Monday-Wednesday. This is actually a great way to learn; though,
    granted, probably not for everyone.\
    \
    I too am amazed 300 completed the coursework; you lived up to your
    promise, the course was hard! I have to disagree with: 'People who
    work cannot take 16 hours a week to do problems' - I did, and I'm
    sure at least some of the other 300 did as well. It was \_hard\_,
    but it was doable. And, for shorter courses, a quick sprint is
    feasible - I don't disagree with your comment about breaking them
    down into shorter chunks (your course was about as long as I could
    manage, I was beginning to run out of steam). That said, I took a
    day off work to complete the final, so maybe that invalidates my
    argument.\
    \
    On the assignments: I see this as the biggest stumbling block to
    MOOC growth. Your assignments did a pretty good job of getting
    around the limitations, but they are nonetheless very tight
    limitations. There were a few econometric-based questions that I
    gave up on because I couldn't get coursera to take the numbers. I
    think, in most cases, I was fairly close, but may have been doing
    something stupid. But, there were occasions where I took the zero
    for 'no work' over the zero for 'a lot of work but not quite there'
    because I didn't have the time. And multiple choice questions are
    obviously less than ideal but still nonetheless (brute force,
    obvious answers etc etc). I don't want to sound as if I'm detracting
    from your course here; the assignments were still excellent and
    \_really\_ helped me. The algebra questions worked very well, I
    never had any problems with machine grading of those. But, online
    assignments are limiting, is my point. I imagine those taking the
    course at booth got an even better course!\
    \
    Lastly, thanks (again!). You are not kidding about the high fixed
    costs. I've followed a number of coursera courses - although this is
    the first I've done the assignments for - and this is one of the
    highest-production-quality courses I've taken (my only gripe, the
    intro music. It was a good intro, but after what must have been
    close to five hundred listens - start and end, 100 lectures,
    probably average of twice each lecture - it wore thin...).

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=6710248300541732200)

2.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Unknown](http://www.blogger.com/profile/12245308544165673425)[February
    10, 2014 at 7:45
    AM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392039923127#c7682373133539158014)

    I read both this post as well as the internal paper that Pr Gibbs
    had posted online with great interest. Having been skeptical of the
    hype surrounding MOOCS it is very interesting to read about actual
    observations.\
    \
    The Flipped Classroom is potentially a very exciting idea, even if
    daunting and more difficult for the professor. Putting the analytics
    to even better use, you can see which concepts are well understood
    by the class, and which need more work. This could mean that each
    in-class session is tailored to the needs of that class on a given
    day.\
    \
    "Knowing the wrong answers" can be a path to improving the software.
    I could see linking questions to time slots in the videos. When you
    get your results, you don't just get a 7/10, but you also get links
    to passages where the concept you missed is explained, so you can
    review that section again. \
    \
    In the same vein, I could see not just answer key explanations of
    why the right answer is right, but also explanations of what common
    mistakes lead to choosing wrong answers, and bringing them on the
    path to better understanding the concept.\
    \
    Standalone, I didn't see much value in MOOCS. Under the "improved
    interactive textbook" understanding I do believe they can greatly
    contribute to the in class learning experience.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=7682373133539158014)

3.  ![image](//lh4.googleusercontent.com/-bTL0A1djc2Q/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAABbI8/_pyqFohLnKQ/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Joseph
    Hartman](http://www.blogger.com/profile/08669542062876450347)[February
    10, 2014 at 3:02
    PM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392066169598#c7294267899718734729)

    Great stuff. More please.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=7294267899718734729)

4.  ![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/anon36.png)

    RW[February 10, 2014 at 4:54
    PM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392072855365#c8435594346802865715)

    I also completed Prof. Cocharne Coursera course, and I have to agree
    with Angus. It is customary for CFA candidates to do 15h a week for
    18 weeks. May I suggest that most students who are interested by a
    PhD-level 'MOOC' want more and not less of the stuff. I believe the
    assignments were quite good and you have to accept that on-line
    delivery will work better in some aspects and worst in others in
    comparison to a live class.\
    \
    Now regarding business models, may I suggest that for some time the
    successful MOOCs as provided by Universities will likely be akin to
    the WSJ, FT and NYT web sites - i.e., an equilibrium between
    freebies and the full kabang. The freebies (the MOOCs) are of the
    same quality as the full kabang or indicative of the quality of full
    kabang (i.e. on-site curriculum degrees), but only allow for
    'partial knowledge'. It is an effective way for top universities to
    consolidate their brand and will not be easily matched by 'a
    university in the middle of nowhere'. I assume Prof. Cocharne was
    not referring to a certain university in up-state NY - some people
    can be sensitive ;)

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8435594346802865715)

5.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Karthik/SK/wimpy/SKimpy](http://www.blogger.com/profile/14739419013546787051)[February
    10, 2014 at 9:07
    PM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392088071239#c2072696262590754332)

    I took half your course on Asset Pricing on Coursera before I
    dropped out (work pressures meant I wasn't able to keep up with the
    assignments, and once I had missed a couple of assignments I had no
    incentive to keep going in the course). Despite the technical issues
    you've mentioned here, I must say I absolutely loved and enjoyed the
    assignments, and must say that they were the main means of learning
    - the book and your lectures were secondary! So kudos on that! \
    \
    And what I absolutely loved about your course was about how you
    brought together several concepts I'd learnt in different courses
    when I'd been to business school (at one of the better schools in
    India), and tied them all together. I hope to take your course again
    when you offer it next year (I hope you will) and take it forward
    from where I left off this year. \
    \
    And here is a blog post I'd written halfway through your course,
    when I was still diligently doing my assignments:\
    \
    http://noenthuda.com/blog/2013/10/07/studying-on-coursera/

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=2072696262590754332)

6.  ![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/anon36.png)

    J Fox[February 11, 2014 at 1:44
    AM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392104663758#c9170179598351920157)

    No need to caveat the length of your post. I find the details of
    your MOOC experience to be fascinating, and the large number of your
    anecdotal observations paints a richer picture than would a post
    half the length. Online education is a very important subject, yet
    much of what I've read on this topic looks like it was written by
    someone pushing an agenda. Thank you for furthering my knowledge in
    this area.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=9170179598351920157)

7.  ![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/anon36.png)

    Adrian Meli[February 11, 2014 at 4:58
    PM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392159515231#c668969396805799845)

    Thought this was great-hadn't considered how difficult it is today
    to teach a course in a MOOC vs on-campus but it makes sense. I guess
    similarly it will make sense that as the tools get better and
    professors move up the learning curve the barriers to adding new
    MOOCs will decrease.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=668969396805799845)

8.  ![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/anon36.png)

    [Mark McGuire](http://markmcguire.net)[February 12, 2014 at 4:03
    AM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392199435789#c3372982670765410156)

    It's very helpful to read an honest and thoughtful report from
    someone who has delivered a Coursera MOOC and can reflect on it
    critically (theory without practice makes more sense in theory than
    in practice). I think you are right about the importance of the
    social aspect of learning. So much goes on in a face-to-face
    engagement, especially in small groups, that we simply don't
    understand very well. And we are a long way from designing spaces
    and tools that can support the richness of social interaction
    online. One thing that current Coursera MOOCs don't do well is to
    support social networked learning. The exchanges are still
    predominantly between the teacher and the student; it's still a
    one-to-many, broadcast model. The potential of many-to-many social
    interactions, crowdsourcing and networked collaboration remain
    almost completely untapped. The forums are too crude, limited and
    don't scale well. \
    \
    I'm currently participating the Cathy Davidson's Coursera (Duke)
    "History and Future of (Mostly) Higher Education". Although she's
    trying to open up the format and encourage more horizontal
    collaboration, it's still very much an xMOOC (for edX, Udacity,
    Coursera etc), not a cMOOC (a reference to George Siemens'
    "Connectivist" approach to networked learning). The former aims to
    support the University (which is then able to serve students); the
    latter privileges the personal learning environment of the student
    over the strategic goals of the institution (although, for the
    moment, it assumes the institution is there, to provide the
    intellectual capital and publicly-funded labour). What is
    interesting about the \#FutureEd MOOC is the strategy of encouraging
    nodal courses, discussion groups and related events outside
    Coursera's walled garden, using the coursers material as a set of
    resources and conversation starters. The dynamic between the inside
    and outside, this more open, ecological model, has potential to
    create additional value for both institutional and individual
    participants.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=3372982670765410156)

9.  ![image](//lh3.googleusercontent.com/-OKwb2Szr-QQ/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFeM/KrYnec0ENl0/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Rob
    Underwood](http://www.blogger.com/profile/12196780270108374854)[February
    13, 2014 at 10:59
    AM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392310783096#c4574503701734843767)

    My friend and former Deloitte colleague just posted this blog post
    to his FB page. I wanted to share my comment
    (https://www.facebook.com/johnhagel/posts/10151903992747337?comment\_id=33575914&offset=0&total\_comments=2)
    here too as I think Mr. Cochrane makes some important points (by way
    of background, I'm the CTO at Relay Graduate School of Education in
    NYC, and we just released our first MOOC on Coursera). Here's what I
    wrote on John's page:\
    \
    "Mr. Cochrane's column talks about the difficulty in publishing and
    updating an on-line course. This is a real issue. It was some of my
    team who published (i.e., wrote the HTML for) for our Coursera
    course (https://www.coursera.org/course/teachingcharacter) - I think
    we pushed the limits of what can be done in Coursera pretty far (I
    think they agree too with that assertion). The problem of the
    'concept to release' process for course publishing is something
    we're thinking a lot about at Relay, and in part why we continue to
    rely on our own LMS. I think one trick to wider adoption of MOOCs,
    and on-learning more generally, will be the 'portability' of courses
    for LMS to LMS. We're trying to design for that at Relay, thinking
    of the day soon when we'll want to publish courses to both our own
    LMS as well as other LMS systems, both public and
    private/proprietary. What we need is open standards and a single
    meta-language for on-line courses. There are some attempts out there
    but they have now been widely adopted."

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=4574503701734843767)

10. ![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/anon36.png)

    [Homework Help](http://classof1.com/homework-help)[February 15, 2014
    at 12:27
    PM](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2014/02/mooconomics.html?showComment=1392488853725#c5867040077362889958)

    This is one of the best piece of content on MOOC that i have read in
    recent times.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=5867040077362889958)

[Add comment](javascript:;)

[Load more...](javascript:;)

Comments are welcome. Keep it short, polite, and on topic. \
\
Thanks to a few abusers I am now moderating comments. I welcome
thoughtful disagreement. I will block comments with insulting or abusive
language. I'm also blocking totally inane comments. Try to make some
sense. I am much more likely to allow critical comments if you have the
honesty and courage to use your real name.

[](https://www.blogger.com/comment-iframe.g?blogID=582368152716771238&postID=8774880701011197831)

#### 

[]()

[Newer
Post](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/mulligan-interview.html "Newer Post")
[Older
Post](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/phillips-curve-rip.html "Older Post")
[Home](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/)

Subscribe to: [Post Comments
(Atom)](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/feeds/8774880701011197831/comments/default)

Subscribe To
------------

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Posts

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-netvibes.png)](http://www.netvibes.com/subscribe.php?url=http%3A%2F%2Fjohnhcochrane.blogspot.com%2Ffeeds%2Fposts%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-yahoo.png)](http://add.my.yahoo.com/content?url=http%3A%2F%2Fjohnhcochrane.blogspot.com%2Ffeeds%2Fposts%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png)
Atom](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/feeds/posts/default)

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Posts

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Comments

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-netvibes.png)](http://www.netvibes.com/subscribe.php?url=http%3A%2F%2Fjohnhcochrane.blogspot.com%2Ffeeds%2F8774880701011197831%2Fcomments%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-yahoo.png)](http://add.my.yahoo.com/content?url=http%3A%2F%2Fjohnhcochrane.blogspot.com%2Ffeeds%2F8774880701011197831%2Fcomments%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png)
Atom](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/feeds/8774880701011197831/comments/default)

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Comments

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=Subscribe&widgetId=Subscribe1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Follow On Twitter
-----------------

[Follow @JohnHCochrane](http://twitter.com/johnhcochrane)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML3&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Follow by Email
---------------

  -- --
     
  -- --

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=FollowByEmail&widgetId=FollowByEmail1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

About Me and This Blog
----------------------

[![My
Photo](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-Q5KhADSYrMU/Tve2QcCCTyI/AAAAAAAAADc/2fJ99ki-w5k/s220/Booth_11_portrait_headshot.jpg)](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04842601651429471525)

 [John H. Cochrane](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04842601651429471525)
  ~ This is a blog of news, views, and commentary, from a humorous
    free-market point of view. After one too many rants at the dinner
    table, my kids called me "the grumpy economist," and hence this blog
    and its title. In real life I'm a professor at the University of
    Chicago [Booth School of Business](http://www.chicagobooth.edu/), a
    Senior Fellow of the [Hoover Institution,](http://www.hoover.org/)
    and an adjunct scholar of the [Cato
    Institute.](http://www.cato.org/) I'm not really grumpy by the way!

[View my complete
profile](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04842601651429471525)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=Profile&widgetId=Profile1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Find posts by label
-------------------

-   [Academic
    Articles](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Academic%20Articles)
    (19)
-   [art](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/art) (5)
-   [Commentary](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Commentary)
    (187)
-   [econometrics](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/econometrics)
    (5)
-   [Economists](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Economists)
    (39)
-   [Energy](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Energy)
    (2)
-   [Euro](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Euro) (20)
-   [European Debt
    Crisis](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/European%20Debt%20Crisis)
    (27)
-   [Finance](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Finance)
    (50)
-   [Financial
    Reform](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Financial%20Reform)
    (36)
-   [Growth](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Growth)
    (15)
-   [Health
    economics](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Health%20economics)
    (33)
-   [Immigration](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Immigration)
    (2)
-   [Inequality](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Inequality)
    (1)
-   [Inflation](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Inflation)
    (36)
-   [Interesting
    Papers](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Interesting%20Papers)
    (20)
-   [Interviews](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Interviews)
    (5)
-   [Macro](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Macro) (33)
-   [Micro vs.
    macro](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Micro%20vs.%20macro)
    (10)
-   [Monetary
    Policy](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Monetary%20Policy)
    (53)
-   [nepotism](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/nepotism)
    (4)
-   [Nobel](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Nobel) (12)
-   [off-topic](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/off-topic)
    (5)
-   [Op-eds](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Op-eds)
    (14)
-   [Politics and
    economics](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Politics%20and%20economics)
    (38)
-   [Posts to other
    blogs](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Posts%20to%20other%20blogs)
    (2)
-   [Regulation](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Regulation)
    (57)
-   [Stimulus](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Stimulus)
    (30)
-   [Talks](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Talks) (9)
-   [Taxes](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Taxes) (43)
-   [Teaching](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Teaching)
    (1)
-   [Thesis
    topics](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Thesis%20topics)
    (11)
-   [Trade](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Trade) (1)
-   [Unemployment](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Unemployment)
    (13)
-   [Videos](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Videos)
    (2)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=Label&widgetId=Label1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Blog Archive
------------

-   [▼](javascript:void(0))
    [2014](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2014-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2015-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=17)
    (17)
    -   [▼](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014_02_01_archive.html)
        (9)
        -   [In
            Box](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/in-box.html)
        -   [A Brief History of the Efficient Markets
            Hypothesi...](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/a-brief-history-of-efficient-markets.html)
        -   [Calomiris and Meltzer on Financial
            Reform](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/calomiris-and-meltzer-on-financial.html)
        -   [Mulligan
            interview](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/mulligan-interview.html)
        -   [Mooconomics](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/mooconomics.html)
        -   [Phillips curve,
            RIP](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/phillips-curve-rip.html)
        -   [A mean-variance
            benchmark](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/a-mean-variance-benchmark.html)
        -   [Favorite
            Book](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/favorite-book.html)
        -   [Unemployment](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/unemployment.html)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014_01_01_archive.html)
        (8)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2013](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2013-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2014-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=50)
    (114)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_12_01_archive.html)
        (16)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_11_01_archive.html)
        (5)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_10_01_archive.html)
        (15)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_09_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_08_01_archive.html)
        (9)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_07_01_archive.html)
        (6)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_06_01_archive.html)
        (9)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_05_01_archive.html)
        (12)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_04_01_archive.html)
        (6)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_03_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_02_01_archive.html)
        (5)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2013_01_01_archive.html)
        (9)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2012](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2012-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2013-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=50)
    (127)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_12_01_archive.html)
        (6)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_11_01_archive.html)
        (15)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_10_01_archive.html)
        (8)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_09_01_archive.html)
        (9)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_08_01_archive.html)
        (8)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_07_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_06_01_archive.html)
        (15)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_05_01_archive.html)
        (12)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_04_01_archive.html)
        (6)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_03_01_archive.html)
        (8)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_02_01_archive.html)
        (10)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2012_01_01_archive.html)
        (19)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2011](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2011-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2012-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=6)
    (6)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2011_12_01_archive.html)
        (6)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=BlogArchive&widgetId=BlogArchive1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Favorites and collections
-------------------------

-   [Milton Friedman
    Institute.](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/friedman_letter_comments.htm)
    (2009) A response to the faculty protest at U of C. Fun.
-   [Response to Paul
    Krugman's](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/ecaf_2077.pdf)
    *New York Times* article blasting modern economics
-   [Writing Tips for Ph.D.
    Students.](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/phd_paper_writing.pdf)
    Do as I say not as I do

Collections (Op-eds and similar):

-   [European Debt
    Crisis](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/news.htm#euro)
-   [Asset
    Markets](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/news.htm#assets)
-   [Financial Crisis,
    Regulation](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/news.htm#crisis)
-   [Monetary Policy,
    inflation](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/news.htm#money)
-   [Fiscal
    stimulus](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/news.htm#stimulus)
-   [Health
    insurance](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/news.htm#health)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Favorite links
--------------

[My academic
webpage](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/index.htm)

-   [Research](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/index.htm)
-   [Opeds, blog posts, media,
    etc.](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/news.htm)
-   [Teaching
    materials](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/index.htm)
-   [My soaring
    writing](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/soaring/index.htm)

[ssa.org](http://www.ssa.org/) Soaring, my favorite pastime

Nepotism department:

-   [elizabethfama.com](http://www.elizabethfama.com/) Favorite
    children's book author
-   [Favorite artist](http://www.flickr.com/photos/18695838@N05)
-   [Art, animation, comics, and music.](http://babybeebooks.com/)

[Booth School of Business](http://www.chicagobooth.edu/) Best business
school, coincidentally my employer

[Cato Institute](http://www.cato.org/) My favorite think tank

Economics blogs:

-   [Greg Mankiw](http://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/)
-   [Econbrowser](http://econbrowser.com/) Jim Hamilton and Menzie Chinn
-   [Marginal Revolution](http://marginalrevolution.com/) Tyler Cowen
-   [Supply and Demand](http://caseymulligan.blogspot.com/) Casey
    Mulligan
-   [The last embassy](http://thelastembassy.blogspot.com/) Great health
    policy blog
-   [Steve Williamson](http://newmonetarism.blogspot.com/) A lot more
    than "new monetarism."

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML2&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Followers
---------

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=Followers&widgetId=Followers1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Total Pageviews
---------------

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=Stats&widgetId=Stats1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Copyright John H. Cochrane. Simple template. Powered by
[Blogger](http://www.blogger.com).

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=582368152716771238&widgetType=Attribution&widgetId=Attribution1&action=editWidget&sectionId=footer-3 "Edit")

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.co.uk/2014/02/mooconomics.html
