[Click here to go back to my home page.](index.html)

Writing a Simple Garbage Collector in C

By Matthew Plant

People seem to think that writing a garbage collector is really hard, a
deep magic understood by a few great sages and [Hans Boehm (et
al)](http://hboehm.info/gc/index.html). Well it's not. In fact, it's
rather straight forward. I claim that the hardest part in writing a GC
is writing the memory allocator, which is as hard to write as it is to
look up the malloc example in K&R.

A few important things to note before we begin. First, our code will be
dependent on the Linux kernel. Not GNU/Linux, but the Linux kernel.
Secondly, our code will be 32-bit and not one bit more. Thirdly. Please
don't use this code. I did not intend for it to be wholly correct and
there may be subtle bugs I did not catch. Regardless, the ideas
themselves are still correct. Now, let's get started.

If you see any inaccuracies, please email me at maplant2 at illinois dot
edu.

### Making the Malloc:

To begin, we need to write a memory allocator, or as we will be calling
it, a malloc function. The simplest malloc implementations maintain a
linked-list of free blocks of memory that can be partitioned and given
out as needed. When a user requests a chunk of memory, a block of the
right size is removed from the free list and returned. If no blocks of
the right size exist, either a block of a larger size is partitioned
into smaller blocks or more memory is requested from the kernel. Freeing
a chunk of memory simply adds it back to the free list.

Each chunk of memory in the free list begins with a header describing
the block. Our header will contain two fields, one indicating the size
of the chunk and the second pointing to the next free block of memory:

    typedef struct header {
        unsigned int    size;
        struct block    *next;
    } header_t;

Using headers that are embedded in the memory we allocate is really the
only sensible way of doing this, but it has the added benefit of
automatically word-aligning the chunks, which is important.

Because we will need to keep track of the blocks of memory currently in
use as well as the blocks that are not, we will have a used list in
addition to a free list. Items will be added to the used list when they
are removed from the free list, and vice-versa.

We are almost ready to complete the first step and write our malloc
implementation. Before we do that, we first need to understand how to
request memory from the kernel.

Dynamically allocated memory resides in the so-called heap, a section
memory between the stack and the BSS (uninitialized data segment - all
your global variables that have the default value of zero). The heap
starts at a low address bordering the BSS and ends at the program break,
which resides somewhere between the BSS and the stack. Attempting to
access any memory between the stack and the break will cause an access
violation (unless you access within the amount the stack can be extended
by, but that's a whole separate conversation). In order to obtain more
memory from the kernel, we simply extend the break, thus allowing us to
access more memory. To do this, we call the Unix sbrk system call, which
extends the break by its argument and returns the address of the
previous break on success, thus giving the program more memory. On
failure, sbrk returns -1 casted to a void pointer, which is a terrible
convention that no one likes.

We can use this knowledge to create two functions: morecore and
add\_to\_free\_list. In the case theta we are out of blocks in the free
list, we will call morecore to request more memory. Since requesting the
kernel for more memory is expensive, we will do it in page-size chunks.
Knowing what a page is is not important right now, but a terse
explanation is that it is the smallest unit of virtual memory that can
be mapped to any particular location in physical memory. We will use the
function add\_to\_free\_list to do exactly what it sounds like.

    /*
     * Scan the free list and look for a place to put the block. Basically, we're
     * looking for any block the to be freed block might have been partitioned from.
     */
    static void
    add_to_free_list(header_t *bp)
    {
        header_t *p;

        for (p = freep; !(bp > p && bp < p->next); p = p->next)
            if (p >= p->next && (bp > p || bp < p->next))
                break;

        if (bp + bp->size == p->next) {
            bp->size += p->next->size;
            bp->next = p->next->next;
        } else
            bp->next = p->next;

        if (p + p->size == bp) {
            p->size += bp->size;
            p->next = bp->next;
        } else
            p->next = bp;

        freep = p;
    }

    #define MIN_ALLOC_SIZE 4096 /* We allocate blocks in page sized chunks. */

    /*
     * Request more memory from the kernel.
     */
    static header_t *
    morecore(size_t num_units)
    {
        void *vp;
        header_t *up;

        if (num_units < MIN_ALLOC_SIZE)
            num_units = MIN_ALLOC_SIZE / sizeof(header_t);

        if ((vp = sbrk(num_units * sizeof(header_t))) == (void *) -1)
            return NULL;
                
        up = (header_t *) vp;
        up->size = num_units;
        add_to_free_list (up);
        return freep;
    }

Now that we have our two helper functions, writing our malloc function
is pretty straight forward. We simply scan the free list and use the
first block that is at least as big as the chunk we're trying to find.
Because we use the first block we find instead of trying to find a
"better" block, this algorithm is known as first fit.

A quick note to clarify: the size field in the header struct is measured
in header-sized blocks, and not bytes.

    static header_t base; /* Zero sized block to get us started. */
    static header_t *usedp, *freep;

    /*
     * Find a chunk from the free list and put it in the used list.
     */
    void *
    GC_malloc(size_t alloc_size)
    {
        size_t num_units;
        header_t *p, *prevp;

        num_units = (alloc_size + sizeof(header_t) - 1) / sizeof(header_t) + 1;  
        prevp = freep;

        for (p = prevp->next;; prevp = p, p = p->next) {
            if (p->size >= num_units) { /* Big enough. */
                if (p->size == num_units) /* Exact size. */
                    prevp->next = p->next;
                else {
                    p->size -= num_units;
                    p += p->size;
                    p->size = num_units;
                }

                freep = prevp;
                
                /* Add to p to the used list. */
                if (usedp == NULL)  
                    usedp = p->next = p;
                else {
                    p->next = usedp->next;
                    usedp->next = p;
                }

                return (void *) (p + 1);
            }
            if (p == freep) { /* Not enough memory. */
                p = morecore(num_units);
                if (p == NULL) /* Request for more memory failed. */
                    return NULL;
            }
        }
    }

Note that the success of this function depends on when we first use it
that freep = &base. We'll make sure this is the case in our init
function.

Although this code isn't going to win any awards for low fragmentation,
it'll work. And if it works, that means we can finally get to the fun
part - the garbage collection!

### Mark and Sweep:

We did say that the garbage collector was going to be simple, so we will
be using the simplest algorithm possible: stop the world naive mark and
sweep. This algorithm works in two parts:

First, we scan all the blocks of memory that could possibly point to
heap data and see if any do. To do this, for each word-size chunk in the
memory we're looking at, we look at each block in the used list. If the
word-sized chunk's value is within the range of a used block, we mark
the block.

Next, after all possible memory locations have been searched, we go
through the used list and add to the free list all blocks that haven't
been marked.

Many people (or at least I did) get tripped up into thinking that
garbage collection is impossible in C because by writing a simple
function like malloc there is no way of knowing many things about the
outside world. For example, there is no function in C that returns a
hash map to all the variables that have been stack-allocated. But we can
get by without this, by realizing two important facts:

Firstly (gosh I say that a lot), in C, you can *attempt* to access any
memory location you want. There is no chunk of memory that for some
reason the compiler can access but has an address that cannot be
expressed as an integer and then casted to a pointer. It isn't possible.
If memory is used in a C program, it can be accessed by the program.
This is a confusing notion for programmers unfamiliar to C, as many
languages provide restricted access to virtual memory addresses. C does
not.

Secondly, all variables are stored somewhere in memory. Well duh. But
what that means is that if we know generally where the variables are
stored, we can look through that memory and find all the possible values
of every variable. Additionally, because memory access is generally only
word-aligned, we only need to look through every word in the memory
regions.

Local variables can also be stored in registers, but we won't worry
about this because registers and usually dedicated to local variables,
and by the time our function is called they'll probably be saved on the
stack anyway

Now we have a strategy for the marking phase of our collector: look
through a bunch of memory regions and see if there is any memory that
looks like it references something in the used list. Writing a function
to do that is pretty clear cut:

    #define UNTAG(p) (((unsigned int) (p)) & 0xfffffffc)

    /*
     * Scan a region of memory and mark any items in the used list appropriately.
     * Both arguments should be word aligned.
     */
    static void
    mark_from_region(unsigned int *sp, unsigned int *end)
    {
        header_t *bp;

        for (; sp < end; sp++) {
            unsigned int v = *sp;
            bp = usedp;
            do {
                if (bp + 1 <= v &&
                    bp + 1 + bp->size > v) {
                        bp->next = ((unsigned int) bp->next) | 1;
                        break;
                }
            } while ((bp = UNTAG(bp->next)) != usedp);
        }
    }

To ensure we only use two words in the header we use a technique here
called tagged pointers. Since our next pointers will be word aligned, a
few of the least significant bits will always be zero. Thus, we mark the
least significant bit of the next pointer to indicate that the current
block (not the one pointed to by next!) has been marked.

Now we can scan memory regions, but which memory regions should we look
through? There are several

1.  The BSS (uninitialized data segment) and the initialized data
    segment. These contain all the global and static variables in the
    program. Thus, they could reference something in our heap.
2.  The used chunks. Of course, if the user allocates a pointer to
    another allocated chunk, we don't want to free the pointed-to chunk.
3.  The stack. Since the stack contains all the local variables, this is
    arguably the most important place to look.

But now there's the problem of knowing where these memory regions start
and end. We already know where the used chunks are, but the other
regions are trickier.

We already know everything about the heap, so writing a mark\_from\_heap
function is trivial:

    /*
     * Scan the marked blocks for references to other unmarked blocks.
     */
    static void
    mark_from_heap(void)
    {
        unsigned int *vp;
        header_t *bp, *up;

        for (bp = UNTAG(usedp->next); bp != usedp; bp = UNTAG(bp->next)) {
            if (!((unsigned int)bp->next & 1))
                continue;
            for (vp = (unsigned int *)(bp + 1);
                 vp < (bp + bp->size + 1);
                 vp++) {
                unsigned int v = *vp;
                up = UNTAG(bp->next);
                do {
                    if (up != bp &&
                        up + 1 <= v &&
                        up + 1 + up->size > v) {
                        up->next = ((unsigned int) up->next) | 1;
                        break;
                    }
                } while ((up = UNTAG(up->next)) != bp);
            }
        }
    }

Fortunately for the BSS and initialized data segments, most modern Unix
linkers export the etext and end symbols. The address of the etext
symbol is the start of the initialized data segment (the last address
past the text segment, which contains the program's machine code), and
the address of the end symbol is the start of the heap. Thus, the BSS
and initialized data segment are located in between &etext and &end.
This is simple enough, but not platform independent.

The stack is a little harder. The top of the stack is super simple to
find using a little bit of inline assembly, as it is stored in the %esp
register. However, we'll be using the %ebp register as it ignores a few
local variables.

Finding the very bottom of the stack (where the stack began) involves
some trickery. Kernels tend to randomize the starting point of the stack
for security reasons, so we can't hard code an address. To be honest,
I'm not an expert on finding the bottom of the stack, but I have a few
rather poor ideas on how you can make an accurate. One possible way is
you could scan the call stack for the env pointer, which would be passed
as an argument to main. Another way would be to start at the top of the
stack and read every subsequent address greater and handling the
inexorible SIGSEGV. But we're not going to do it either way. Instead,
we're going to exploit the fact that linux puts the bottom of the stack
in a string in a file in the process's entry in the proc directory
(phew!). This sounds silly and terribly indirect. Fortunately, I don't
feel ridiculous for doing doing it because it's literally *the exact
same thing Boehm GC does to find the bottom of the stack!*

Now we can make ourselves a little init function. In it, we open the
proc file on ourselves and find the bottom of the stack. This is the
28th value printed so we discard the first 27. Boehm GC differs from us
in that they only use sys calls to do the file reading in order to avoid
the stdlib from using the heap, but we don't really care.

    /*
     * Find the absolute bottom of the stack and set stuff up.
     */
    void
    GC_init(void)
    {
        static int initted;
        FILE *statfp;

        if (initted)
            return;

        initted = 1;

        statfp = fopen("/proc/self/stat", "r");
        assert(statfp != NULL);
        fscanf(statfp,
               "%*d %*s %*c %*d %*d %*d %*d %*d %*u "
               "%*lu %*lu %*lu %*lu %*lu %*lu %*ld %*ld "
               "%*ld %*ld %*ld %*ld %*llu %*lu %*ld "
               "%*lu %*lu %*lu %lu", &stack_bottom);
        fclose(statfp);

        usedp = NULL;
        base.next = freep = &base;
        base.size = 0;
    }

Now we know the location of every memory region we would need to scan,
and thus, we can finally write our explicitly-called collection
function:

    /*
     * Mark blocks of memory in use and free the ones not in use.
     */
    void
    GC_collect(void)
    {
        header_t *p, *prevp, *tp;
        unsigned long stack_top;
        extern char end, etext; /* Provided by the linker. */

        if (usedp == NULL)
            return;
        
        /* Scan the BSS and initialized data segments. */
        mark_from_region(&etext, &end);

        /* Scan the stack. */
        asm volatile ("movl %%ebp, %0" : "=r" (stack_top));
        mark_from_region(stack_top, stack_bottom);

        /* Mark from the heap. */
        mark_from_heap();

        /* And now we collect! */
        for (prevp = usedp, p = UNTAG(usedp->next);; prevp = p, p = UNTAG(p->next)) {
        next_chunk:
            if (!((unsigned int)p->next & 1)) {
                /*
                 * The chunk hasn't been marked. Thus, it must be set free. 
                 */
                tp = p;
                p = UNTAG(p->next);
                add_to_free_list(tp);

                if (usedp == tp) { 
                    usedp = NULL;
                    break;
                }

                prevp->next = (unsigned int)p | ((unsigned int) prevp->next & 1);
                goto next_chunk;
            }
            p->next = ((unsigned int) p->next) & ~1;
            if (p == usedp)
                break;
        }
    }

And that, my friends, is all there is. One simple garbage collector
written in C and for C. This code isn't complete in itself, it needs a
few little tweaks here in there to get it working, but most of the code
mostly holds up on its own.

### Conclusion:

From elementary school through half of high school, I played drums.
Every Wednesday at around 4:30 pm I had a drum lesson from a teacher who
was quite good.

Whenever I was having trouble learning a new groove or beat or whatever,
he would always give me the same diagnosis: I was trying to do
everything at once. I looked at the sheet of music, and I simply tried
to play with all my hands. But I couldn't. And the reason why is because
I didn't know how to play the groove yet, and simply trying to play the
groove wasn't how I was going to learn.

So my teacher would enlighten me as to how I could learn: don't try
playing everything at once. Learn to play the high-hat part with your
right hand. Once you've got that down, learn to play the snare with your
left. Do the same with the bass, the tom-toms, and whatever other parts
there are. When you have all the individual parts down, slowly begin to
add them together. Add them together in pairs, then in threes, and
eventually you'll be able to play the entire thing

I never got good at drums, but I did take these lessons to heart in my
programming. It's really hard to just start to type out an entire
program. The only algorithm you need to write code is divide and
conquer. Write the function to allocate memory. Then, write the function
to look through memory. Then, write the function that cleans up memory.
Finally, add them all together.

As soon as you get past this barrier as a programmer, nothing practical
becomes \`\`hard''. You may not understand an algorithm, but anyone can
understand an algorithm with enough time, paper, and the right book. If
a project seems daunting, break it up into its individual parts. You may
not know how to write an interpreter, but you sure as hell can write a
parser. Find out what else you need to add, and do it.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://web.engr.illinois.edu/~maplant2/gc.html
