[nature.com](/)
---------------

-   [Sitemap](/siteindex)
-   [Register](/register)
-   [Login](/foxtrot/svc/login)

[![Advertisment](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/ad/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;dcopt=ist;ptile=1;sz=728x90;pos=top;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=8906381464096959?)](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/jump/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;dcopt=ist;ptile=1;sz=728x90;pos=top;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=8906381464096959?)

[Nature](/nature)
-----------------

### International weekly journal of science

Search Go [Advanced
search](/search/adv_search?sp-q-1=nature,news,nnewsb)

-   [Home](/nature/index.html)
-   [News &
    Comment](http://www.nature.com/news/nature-news-comment-2.788)
-   [Research](/nature/research/research_by_type.html)
-   [Careers & Jobs](/nature/careers/index.html)
-   [Current Issue](/nature/current_issue.html)
-   [Archive](/nature/archive/index.html)
-   [Audio & Video](/nature/audio_video/index.html)
-   [For Authors](/nature/authors/index.html)

-   [Archive](/nature/archive/index.html)
-   [Volume 506](/nature/journal/v506/n7487/index.html)
-   [Issue 7487](/nature/journal/v506/n7487/index.html)
-   [News Feature](/nature/journal/v506/n7487/index.html)
-   Article

Nature | News Feature

### Sharing

-   [![Print](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAQAKECAIeHh46Ojv///////yH5BAEKAAMALAAAAAAQABAAAAIslIGpxgLdHpTQVTpbQPWAIGxcl4jKiaaLo55eC8fJ0VksTR4mu5QMFrm0GAUAOw==)](javascript:window.print())
-   [![Email](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAQAKECAIeHh46Ojv///////yH5BAEKAAMALAAAAAAQABAAAAIolI+piwEPY3RASGljvlvzC3UdKDgjWJ3o+gRqRQEuWz6vF7Myw/dJAQA7)](/news/foxtrot/svc/mailform?doi=10.1038/506150a&file=/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700)
-   #### ![Share/bookmark](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODdhEAAQAOMOAIeHh4+Pj5aWlp6enqWlpa2trbS0tMPDw8rKytLS0tnZ2eHh4ejo6Pf39////////ywAAAAAEAAQAAAEU9DJSR0CQLBaF8YCRx0fJk5GCZyJoCKNQRSb4gZHkxwb8QU+XIOjAhCGomIAcfJhAi1AAUmJzTaNQmbh2HFPiEDmwzwxBqqThFRSOxilkPuSYUQAADs=)

    -   [![Facebook](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEgASALMMAICdvoCcvkVuqujv+env+enw+WV5qIGdvkZuqkZvq0Zvqv///wAAAAAAAAAAAAAAACH5BAEAAAwALAAAAAASABIAAARykMlJq71YDpW6VwinEFSigIjXpSbFhYpwGsSytJMJispgLydXLBFKCGynYG4Fktk6SkmIlfj9cJLkKTEo2AoEECVFJiqenhJZYEIgESH1C/aEI1yBwyEA0NsAAAEKY3p8eQA2fAcJFAMsWnBJJBmUlRcRADs=)](http://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700)
    -   [![Twitter](data:image/gif;base64,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)](http://twitter.com/home/?status=Scientific+method%3A+Statistical+errors+http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700)
    -   [![Delicious](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEgASAKIAAOPj4+Lj4wA2/+Pk5AA1/wAAAP///wAAACH5BAAAAAAALAAAAAASABIAAANQaLrc7kTIKN+KFFslst5EiIWbEXaiUIqsCrJiiZ6kUdz4PQQBsAcDRS43APQGyIBwqDP6fEEbswBE7pBLptVXzQ551qM35wSaxzjrFVjaJAAAOw==)](http://del.icio.us/post?url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700&title=Scientific+method%3A+Statistical+errors)
    -   [![Digg](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEgASALMMAOPj49bW1tXV1eLj4+zs7La2tre3t+3t7aurq+Pk5Kqqqv///wAAAAAAAAAAAAAAACH5BAEAAAwALAAAAAASABIAAARykMlJq704G1M2skg4GUu5KJVifkxRHgQ6qeahcAs8KJ1E5wmV6zAIAmS0QyKgUjgRCkTQtyAsBaqENjEoyhjQ0G14gAW/vlHOfLR8XQSlFs2IykgEgAHQnplQJEUFA31UOSguRQZzFE9QdVBOkhmUlRgRADs=)](http://digg.com/submit?phase=2&url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700&title=Scientific+method%3A+Statistical+errors)
    -   [![Google+](data:image/gif;base64,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)](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700&title=Scientific+method%3A+Statistical+errors)
    -   [![LinkedIn](data:image/gif;base64,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)](http://www.linkedin.com/cws/share?url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700&title=Scientific+method%3A+Statistical+errors)
    -   [![StumbleUpon](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEgASAPcAAO5fOu5dN/n5+e1VLO5eOfz9/vj5+vr6+/r6+u1aMvn6+/39/+9oR/ezpu1YMexTKf39/e9xVOxSKO1UKfOSfvrNxO1ZMu5eOv39/f76+e5gPPWhkPn5+fF9Y+5cNu1ZMfXSzPnFu+xTKPB4XPKMdvWome9wUvKEbPWpmu1UKv3v7exRJv739vrKwfBqS/apmvj19fBzVvzg2/n5+vWei/e6rvKFbvzo5PnKwfWfjvnw7vKJcvWcif/9/e5fOe9rTPKMd/rRyv7x7vnJv/KAaPv8/fB6X/nt6/SVgvWjkve1qPfr6/78+/jx8fv7+/z8/fi9sv///vWikfj29/auoO9kQfewo+1VLe5dNvrOxfOVgfe1qPzk3/zj3/rLw/B4Xfn5+fj09PjEuvWjk/r4+Pzk3/e9sfF7YOxUKfzn5Pr09Pbg3e1WLvOQe/v7/Pn6+/e8sO1aNPjFu/KKc/r7/O5iPu9yVP729PBpSP/+/u1XMPfp6O5bNO1bNO9vUfatnvWllPbf3O1cNfB2W//9/fz8/P7+/u5cNe9rS+9mRfWiku1bNe1WLf39/u1XLu5fO+5gO////wAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAACH5BAAAAAAALAAAAAASABIAAAj/ACM9KbCgUYECjRIqJLigSCQMkSJGEgIFyYkTWuCokPjQjUQzLiYwcvCBERo8NSTSORApz5gHix5BgiQTkiAJOQhFesNyiwQAMwk4ckRgJoAVVnYeuFHHg8wAkChQ0AAVUgAAZXi+eGB0UYiIchYBhTQhyRsyHT7QXGQi0pAKkSLEhGTByBQdiDxA6vMgRiQqETZUYRSHKoMlRxgEsFACx5dIDTqUMCEGUIIAifaosbNoAFwSkf40iLQjSpYBi/w0QdCGESMakXTOARIpQyQpjNiQMIDAy4ALWBS14MHn0IYgKAhcSBGCNxMbAyANdfTokSM9jgBcIZKBd6Q0PxjRPRw/UzqDMpEMOInY5YyIBASq+0ggYoSMiDMMSWSxZQQkBw48MkgDd0gEEQZgJAgGDGuAAEIgYSgIRiGRBAQAOw==)](http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit?url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700&title=Scientific+method%3A+Statistical+errors)
    -   [![Reddit](data:image/gif;base64,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)](http://www.reddit.com/s/http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700)

Scientific method: Statistical errors
=====================================

*P* values, the 'gold standard' of statistical validity, are not as
reliable as many scientists assume.

-   [Regina Nuzzo](#auth-1)^[1](#a1)^

12 February 2014

Article tools
-------------

-   [PDF](http://www.nature.com:80/polopoly_fs/1.14700!/menu/main/topColumns/topLeftColumn/pdf/506150a.pdf)
-   [Rights &
    Permissions](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?author=Regina+Nuzzo&title=Scientific+method%3A+Statistical+errors&publisherName=NPG&contentID=10.1038%2F506150a&publicationDate=02%2F12%2F2014&publication=Nature+News)

![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15481.1392118822!/image/pvalue_art.jpg_gen/derivatives/landscape_630/pvalue_art.jpg)

DALE EDWIN MURRAY

For a brief moment in 2010, Matt Motyl was on the brink of scientific
glory: he had discovered that extremists quite literally see the world
in black and white.

![image](/polopoly_fs/7.12926.1391622945!/image/top-picks_final.png_gen/derivatives/fullsize/top-picks_final.png)

-   [Stephen Hawking questions the nature of black
    holes](http://www.nature.com/news/stephen-hawking-there-are-no-black-holes-1.14583)
-   [Bumblebees can fly at altitudes higher than peak of Mount
    Everest](http://www.nature.com/news/himalayan-heights-pose-no-problem-for-bees-1.14670)
-   [UK immigration debate alienating scientists and
    students](http://www.nature.com/news/uk-visa-problems-worry-scientists-1.14665)

The results were “plain as day”, recalls Motyl, a psychology PhD student
at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. Data from a study of
nearly 2,000 people seemed to show that political moderates saw shades
of grey more accurately than did either left-wing or right-wing
extremists. “The hypothesis was sexy,” he says, “and the data provided
clear support.” The *P* value, a common index for the strength of
evidence, was 0.01 — usually interpreted as 'very significant'.
Publication in a high-impact journal seemed within Motyl's grasp.

But then reality intervened. Sensitive to controversies over
reproducibility, Motyl and his adviser, Brian Nosek, decided to
replicate the study. With extra data, the *P* value came out as 0.59 —
not even close to the conventional level of significance, 0.05. The
effect had disappeared, and with it, Motyl's dreams of youthful
fame^[1](#b1)^.

It turned out that the problem was not in the data or in Motyl's
analyses. It lay in the surprisingly slippery nature of the *P* value,
which is neither as reliable nor as objective as most scientists assume.
“*P* values are not doing their job, because they can't,” says Stephen
Ziliak, an economist at Roosevelt University in Chicago, Illinois, and a
frequent critic of the way statistics are used.

For many scientists, this is especially worrying in light of the
reproducibility concerns. In 2005, epidemiologist John Ioannidis of
Stanford University in California suggested that most published findings
are false^[2](#b2)^; since then, a string of high-profile replication
problems has forced scientists to rethink how they evaluate results.

At the same time, statisticians are looking for better ways of thinking
about data, to help scientists to avoid missing important information or
acting on false alarms. “Change your statistical philosophy and all of a
sudden different things become important,” says Steven Goodman, a
physician and statistician at Stanford. “Then 'laws' handed down from
God are no longer handed down from God. They're actually handed down to
us by ourselves, through the methodology we adopt.”

Out of context
--------------

*P* values have always had critics. In their almost nine decades of
existence, they have been likened to mosquitoes (annoying and impossible
to swat away), the emperor's new clothes (fraught with obvious problems
that everyone ignores) and the tool of a “sterile intellectual rake” who
ravishes science but leaves it with no progeny^[3](#b3)^. One researcher
suggested rechristening the methodology “statistical hypothesis
inference testing”^[3](#b3)^, presumably for the acronym it would yield.

The irony is that when UK statistician Ronald Fisher introduced the *P*
value in the 1920s, he did not mean it to be a definitive test. He
intended it simply as an informal way to judge whether evidence was
significant in the old-fashioned sense: worthy of a second look. The
idea was to run an experiment, then see if the results were consistent
with what random chance might produce. Researchers would first set up a
'null hypothesis' that they wanted to disprove, such as there being no
correlation or no difference between two groups. Next, they would play
the devil's advocate and, assuming that this null hypothesis was in fact
true, calculate the chances of getting results at least as extreme as
what was actually observed. This probability was the *P* value. The
smaller it was, suggested Fisher, the greater the likelihood that the
straw-man null hypothesis was false.

[![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15482.1392118899!/image/p-graphic.jpg_gen/derivatives/landscape_630/p-graphic.jpg)](http://www.nature.com/news/506150a-i2-jpg-7.15482?article=1.14700)

R. NUZZO; SOURCE: T. SELLKE ET AL. AM. STAT. 55, 62–71 (2001)

For all the *P* value's apparent precision, Fisher intended it to be
just one part of a fluid, non-numerical process that blended data and
background knowledge to lead to scientific conclusions. But it soon got
swept into a movement to make evidence-based decision-making as rigorous
and objective as possible. This movement was spearheaded in the late
1920s by Fisher's bitter rivals, Polish mathematician Jerzy Neyman and
UK statistician Egon Pearson, who introduced an alternative framework
for data analysis that included statistical power, false positives,
false negatives and many other concepts now familiar from introductory
statistics classes. They pointedly left out the *P* value.

But while the rivals feuded — Neyman called some of Fisher's work
mathematically “worse than useless”; Fisher called Neyman's approach
“childish” and “horrifying [for] intellectual freedom in the west” —
other researchers lost patience and began to write statistics manuals
for working scientists. And because many of the authors were
non-statisticians without a thorough understanding of either approach,
they created a hybrid system that crammed Fisher's easy-to-calculate *P*
value into Neyman and Pearson's reassuringly rigorous rule-based system.
This is when a *P* value of 0.05 became enshrined as 'statistically
significant', for example. “The *P* value was never meant to be used the
way it's used today,” says Goodman.

What does it all mean?
----------------------

One result is an abundance of confusion about what the *P* value
means^[4](#b4)^. Consider Motyl's study about political extremists. Most
scientists would look at his original *P* value of 0.01 and say that
there was just a 1% chance of his result being a false alarm. But they
would be wrong. The *P* value cannot say this: all it can do is
summarize the data assuming a specific null hypothesis. It cannot work
backwards and make statements about the underlying reality. That
requires another piece of information: the odds that a real effect was
there in the first place. To ignore this would be like waking up with a
headache and concluding that you have a rare brain tumour — possible,
but so unlikely that it requires a lot more evidence to supersede an
everyday explanation such as an allergic reaction. The more implausible
the hypothesis — telepathy, aliens, homeopathy — the greater the chance
that an exciting finding is a false alarm, no matter what the *P* value
is.

![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15514.1392120513!/image/Reproducibility-logo.jpg_gen/derivatives/fullsize/Reproducibility-logo.jpg)

***Nature* special:**[Challenges in irreproducible
research](http://www.nature.com/nature/focus/reproducibility/index.html)

These are sticky concepts, but some statisticians have tried to provide
general rule-of-thumb conversions (see ['Probable cause'](#cause)).
According to one widely used calculation^[5](#b5)^, a *P* value of 0.01
corresponds to a false-alarm probability of at least 11%, depending on
the underlying probability that there is a true effect; a *P* value of
0.05 raises that chance to at least 29%. So Motyl's finding had a
greater than one in ten chance of being a false alarm. Likewise, the
probability of replicating his original result was not 99%, as most
would assume, but something closer to 73% — or only 50%, if he wanted
another 'very significant' result^[6](#b6),\\ [7](#b7)^. In other words,
his inability to replicate the result was about as surprising as if he
had called heads on a coin toss and it had come up tails.

Critics also bemoan the way that *P* values can encourage muddled
thinking. A prime example is their tendency to deflect attention from
the actual size of an effect. Last year, for example, a study of more
than 19,000 people showed^[8](#b8)^ that those who meet their spouses
online are less likely to divorce (*p* < 0.002) and more likely to have
high marital satisfaction (*p* < 0.001) than those who meet offline (see
Nature [http://doi.org/rcg](http://doi.org/rcg); 2013). That might have
sounded impressive, but the effects were actually tiny: meeting online
nudged the divorce rate from 7.67% down to 5.96%, and barely budged
happiness from 5.48 to 5.64 on a 7-point scale. To pounce on tiny *P*
values and ignore the larger question is to fall prey to the “seductive
certainty of significance”, says Geoff Cumming, an emeritus psychologist
at La Trobe University in Melbourne, Australia. But significance is no
indicator of practical relevance, he says: “We should be asking, 'How
much of an effect is there?', not 'Is there an effect?'”

Perhaps the worst fallacy is the kind of self-deception for which
psychologist Uri Simonsohn of the University of Pennsylvania and his
colleagues have popularized the term *P*-hacking; it is also known as
data-dredging, snooping, fishing, significance-chasing and
double-dipping. “*P*-hacking,” says Simonsohn, “is trying multiple
things until you get the desired result” — even unconsciously. It may be
the first statistical term to rate a definition in the online Urban
Dictionary, where the usage examples are telling: “That finding seems to
have been obtained through *p*-hacking, the authors dropped one of the
conditions so that the overall *p*-value would be less than .05”, and
“She is a *p*-hacker, she always monitors data while it is being
collected.”

> “The *P* value was never meant to be used the way it's used today.”

Such practices have the effect of turning discoveries from exploratory
studies — which should be treated with scepticism — into what look like
sound confirmations but vanish on replication. Simonsohn's simulations
have shown^[9](#b9)^ that changes in a few data-analysis decisions can
increase the false-positive rate in a single study to 60%. *P*-hacking
is especially likely, he says, in today's environment of studies that
chase small effects hidden in noisy data. It is tough to pin down how
widespread the problem is, but Simonsohn has the sense that it is
serious. In an analysis^[10](#b10)^, he found evidence that many
published psychology papers report *P* values that cluster suspiciously
around 0.05, just as would be expected if researchers fished for
significant *P* values until they found one.

Numbers game
------------

Despite the criticisms, reform has been slow. “The basic framework of
statistics has been virtually unchanged since Fisher, Neyman and Pearson
introduced it,” says Goodman. John Campbell, a psychologist now at the
University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, bemoaned the issue in 1982, when
he was editor of the *Journal of Applied Psychology*: “It is almost
impossible to drag authors away from their *p*-values, and the more
zeroes after the decimal point, the harder people cling to
them”^[11](#b11)^. In 1989, when Kenneth Rothman of Boston University in
Massachusetts started the journal *Epidemiology*, he did his best to
discourage *P* values in its pages. But he left the journal in 2001, and
*P* values have since made a resurgence.

Ioannidis is currently mining the PubMed database for insights into how
authors across many fields are using *P* values and other statistical
evidence. “A cursory look at a sample of recently published papers,” he
says, “is convincing that *P* values are still very, very popular.”

Any reform would need to sweep through an entrenched culture. It would
have to change how statistics is taught, how data analysis is done and
how results are reported and interpreted. But at least researchers are
admitting that they have a problem, says Goodman. “The wake-up call is
that so many of our published findings are not true.” Work by
researchers such as Ioannidis shows the link between theoretical
statistical complaints and actual difficulties, says Goodman. “The
problems that statisticians have predicted are exactly what we're now
seeing. We just don't yet have all the fixes.”

Statisticians have pointed to a number of measures that might help. To
avoid the trap of thinking about results as significant or not
significant, for example, Cumming thinks that researchers should always
report effect sizes and confidence intervals. These convey what a *P*
value does not: the magnitude and relative importance of an effect.

Many statisticians also advocate replacing the *P* value with methods
that take advantage of Bayes' rule: an eighteenth-century theorem that
describes how to think about probability as the plausibility of an
outcome, rather than as the potential frequency of that outcome. This
entails a certain subjectivity — something that the statistical pioneers
were trying to avoid. But the Bayesian framework makes it comparatively
easy for observers to incorporate what they know about the world into
their conclusions, and to calculate how probabilities change as new
evidence arises.

Others argue for a more ecumenical approach, encouraging researchers to
try multiple methods on the same data set. Stephen Senn, a statistician
at the Centre for Public Health Research in Luxembourg City, likens this
to using a floor-cleaning robot that cannot find its own way out of a
corner: any data-analysis method will eventually hit a wall, and some
common sense will be needed to get the process moving again. If the
various methods come up with different answers, he says, “that's a
suggestion to be more creative and try to find out why”, which should
lead to a better understanding of the underlying reality.

Simonsohn argues that one of the strongest protections for scientists is
to admit everything. He encourages authors to brand their papers
'*P*-certified, not *P*-hacked' by including the words: “We report how
we determined our sample size, all data exclusions (if any), all
manipulations and all measures in the study.” This disclosure will, he
hopes, discourage *P*-hacking, or at least alert readers to any
shenanigans and allow them to judge accordingly.

A related idea that is garnering attention is two-stage analysis, or
'preregistered replication', says political scientist and statistician
Andrew Gelman of Columbia University in New York City. In this approach,
exploratory and confirmatory analyses are approached differently and
clearly labelled. Instead of doing four separate small studies and
reporting the results in one paper, for instance, researchers would
first do two small exploratory studies and gather potentially
interesting findings without worrying too much about false alarms. Then,
on the basis of these results, the authors would decide exactly how they
planned to confirm the findings, and would publicly preregister their
intentions in a database such as the Open Science Framework
([https://osf.io](https://osf.io)). They would then conduct the
replication studies and publish the results alongside those of the
exploratory studies. This approach allows for freedom and flexibility in
analyses, says Gelman, while providing enough rigour to reduce the
number of false alarms being published.

More broadly, researchers need to realize the limits of conventional
statistics, Goodman says. They should instead bring into their analysis
elements of scientific judgement about the plausibility of a hypothesis
and study limitations that are normally banished to the discussion
section: results of identical or similar experiments, proposed
mechanisms, clinical knowledge and so on. Statistician Richard Royall of
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore, Maryland,
said that there are three questions a scientist might want to ask after
a study: 'What is the evidence?' 'What should I believe?' and 'What
should I do?' One method cannot answer all these questions, Goodman
says: “The numbers are where the scientific discussion should start, not
end.”

Journal name:
  ~ Nature
Volume:
  ~ 506,
Pages:
  ~ 150–152
Date published:
  ~ (13 February 2014)
DOI:
  ~ doi:10.1038/506150a

-   **See Editorial** [page
    131](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/506131b)

References
==========

1.  Nosek, B. A., Spies, J. R. & Motyl, M. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7,
    615–631 (2012).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691612459058)

2.  Ioannidis, J. P. A. PLoS Med. 2, e124 (2005).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124)
    -   [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=16060722&dopt=Abstract)

3.  Lambdin, C. Theory Psychol. 22, 67–90 (2012).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0959354311429854)

4.  Goodman, S. N. Ann. Internal Med. 130, 995–1004 (1999).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-130-12-199906150-00008)
    -   [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVerhttp://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVersion=2&SrcAuth=Nature&SrcApp=Nature&DestLinkType=FullRecord&KeyUT=000080894700007&DestApp=WOS_CPL)
    -   [ChemPort](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:DyaK1M3psVeqsQ%3D%3D&pissn=0028-0836&md5=3994002eec57c4c72299bf5057cd08a1)

5.  Goodman, S. N. Epidemiology 12, 295–297 (2001).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00001648-200105000-00006)
    -   [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=11337600&dopt=Abstract)
    -   [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVerhttp://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVersion=2&SrcAuth=Nature&SrcApp=Nature&DestLinkType=FullRecord&KeyUT=000168367000006&DestApp=WOS_CPL)
    -   [ChemPort](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:DC%2BD3MvpsVOhtQ%3D%3D&pissn=0028-0836&md5=cc345fda7900067ad76362b0c2c70cd2)

6.  Goodman, S. N. Stat. Med. 11, 875–879 (1992).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.4780110705)
    -   [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=1604067&dopt=Abstract)
    -   [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVerhttp://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVersion=2&SrcAuth=Nature&SrcApp=Nature&DestLinkType=FullRecord&KeyUT=A1992HU18300003&DestApp=WOS_CPL)
    -   [ChemPort](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:DyaK383psVGltA%3D%3D&pissn=0028-0836&md5=6ece2e731e361dbc6a0026b39ebd3241)

7.  Gorroochurn, P., Hodge, S. E., Heiman, G. A., Durner, M. &
    Greenberg, D. A. Genet. Med. 9, 325–321 (2007).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e3180676d79)
    -   [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=17575498&dopt=Abstract)
    -   [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVerhttp://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?amp;GWVersion=2&SrcAuth=Nature&SrcApp=Nature&DestLinkType=FullRecord&KeyUT=000247396200001&DestApp=WOS_CPL)

8.  Cacioppo, J. T., Cacioppo, S., Gonzagab, G. C., Ogburn, E. L. &
    VanderWeele, T. J. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 10135–10140
    (2013).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222447110)
    -   [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=23733955&dopt=Abstract)
    -   [ChemPort](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3sXhtFOmsL%2FO&pissn=0028-0836&md5=31d37f5a231e11a7ff0b2485150f64dc)

9.  Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D. & Simonsohn, U. Psychol. Sci. 22,
    1359–1366 (2011).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797611417632)
    -   [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=22006061&dopt=Abstract)

10. Simonsohn, U., Nelson, L. D. & Simmons, J. P. J. Exp. Psychol.
    [http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0033242](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0033242)
    (2013).

11. Campbell, J. P. J. Appl. Psych. 67, 691–700 (1982).

    -   [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0077946)

Related stories and links
=========================

From nature.com
---------------

-   [Number crunch](/doifinder/10.1038/506131b)
    ===========================================

    12 February 2014

-   [Policy: NIH plans to enhance reproducibility](/doifinder/10.1038/505612a)
    ==========================================================================

    27 January 2014

-   [Weak statistical standards implicated in scientific irreproducibility](/doifinder/10.1038/nature.2013.14131)
    =============================================================================================================

    11 November 2013

-   [Uncertainty on trial](/doifinder/10.1038/502017a)
    ==================================================

    02 October 2013

-   [Matters of significance](/doifinder/10.1038/nmeth.2638)
    ========================================================

    29 August 2013

-   [Announcement: Reducing our irreproducibility](/doifinder/10.1038/496398a)
    ==========================================================================

    24 April 2013

-   [Replication studies: Bad copy](/doifinder/10.1038/485298a)
    ===========================================================

    16 May 2012

-   [Blog post: Let's give statistics the attention it deserves in biological research](http://blogs.nature.com/methagora/2013/08/giving_statistics_the_attention_it_deserves.html)
    ===============================================================================================================================================================================

-   [Blog post: Statistics is the sexy in science](http://www.nature.com/scitable/blog/labcoat-life/statistics_is_the_sexy_in)
    ==========================================================================================================================

-   [*Nature* special: Challenges in irreproducible research](http://www.nature.com/nature/focus/reproducibility/index.html)
    ========================================================================================================================

From elsewhere
--------------

-   [*Psychological Science* tutorial on alternatives to the *P* value](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797613504966)
    ===============================================================================================================

-   [The BUGS (Bayesian inference Using Gibbs Sampling) Project](http://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/bugs/)
    ================================================================================================

-   [Bayesian Cognitive Modelling: A Practical Course](http://bayesmodels.com/)
    ===========================================================================

Author information
==================

Affiliations
------------

1.  ### Regina Nuzzo is a freelance writer and an associate professor of statistics at Gallaudet University in Washington DC.

Author details
--------------

-   ### Regina Nuzzo

    #### Search for this author in

    -   [NPG
        journals](/search/executeSearch?sp-q=%22Regina+Nuzzo%22&sp-p=all&pag-start=1&sp-c=25&sp-m=1&sp-s=date_descending&siteCode=nature&sp-date-range=0&sp-advanced=true&sp-q-9%5BAM%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BAPP_NOTES%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BAVIANFLU%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BCLIMATE%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNATURE%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNATUREJOBS%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNBT%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNCB%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNCHEM%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNCHEMBIO%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNCHINA%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNCLIMATE%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNCOMMS%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNEURO%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNG%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNGEO%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNI%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNINDIA%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNM%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNMAT%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNMETH%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNMIDDLEEAST%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNNANO%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNPHOTON%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNPHYS%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNPROT%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BNSMB%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BSCIENTIFICAMERICAN%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BSCIENTIFICAMERICANMIND%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BSREP%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BSTEMCELLS%5D=1&sp-q-9%5BBLOGS%5D=1)
    -   [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Regina+Nuzzo%5Bauthor%5D)
    -   [Google
        Scholar](http://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=Regina+Nuzzo&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en)

For the best commenting experience, [please login or register as a
user](/foxtrot/svc/login?type=commenting) and agree to our [Community
Guidelines](/info/community-guidelines.html). You will be re-directed
back to this page where you will see comments updating in real-time and
have the ability to recommend comments to other users.

Comments

### 3 comments [Subscribe to comments](http://naturenews.disqus.com/scientific_method_statistical_errors/latest.rss)

![Avatar for Giovanni
Codacci-Pisanelli](https://disqus.com/api/users/avatars/test-npg-c6e297ca7808747aacc47ad3b1dec528.jpg)

Giovanni Codacci-Pisanelli • 2014-02-12 08:16 PM

This article is a long awaited reminder of what statistics can do, and
of what they cannot do! The Peanuts strips about statisticians are
funnier...but not as extensive. In clinical oncology p-values often are
the aim of the clinical trial. Still, just using a computer spreadsheet
programme it is easy to prove that if you enter enough values you p will
become significant even when the difference between two means is
minimal. Unfortunately "statistically significant" is considered a
synonym of "true", but very often it rather seems to mean "clinically
irrelevant" (a trial with a 0.7 weeks difference in progression-free
survival of patients with advanced cancer had a significant p). But what
is even more disturbing is the number of retracted papers (for example
on gene signatures) based on the "statistical evaluation" of
results...that could not be reproduced. We must collaborate with
statisticians, not let them decide what is good for patients.

-   [Share to
    Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This+article+is+a+long+awaited+reminder+of+what+statistics+can+do%2C+and+of+what+they+cannot+do%21+The+Peanuts+strips+about+statisticians+are+funnier...but+not+as+extensive.%0AIn+clinical+oncology+p-values+often+are+the+aim+of+the+clinical+trial.+Still%2C+just+using+a+computer+spreadsheet+programme+it+is+easy+to+prove+that+if+you+enter+enough+values+you+p+will+become+significant+even+when+the+difference+between+two+means+is+minimal.+%0AUnfortunately+%22statistically+significant%22+is+considered+a+synonym+of+%22true%22%2C+but+very+often++it+rather+seems+to+mean+%22clinically+irrelevant%22+%28a+trial+with+a+0.7+weeks+difference+in+progression-free+survival+of+patients+with+advanced+cancer+had+a+significant+p%29.+%0ABut+what+is+even+more+disturbing+is+the+number+of+retracted+papers+%28for+example+on+gene+signatures%29+based+on+the+%22statistical+evaluation%22+of+results...that+could+not+be+reproduced.+%0AWe+must+collaborate+with+statisticians%2C+not+let+them+decide+what+is+good+for+patients.&url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700%23comment-1241694377)
    [Share to
    Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700%23comment-1241694377)
    [Share link to this
    comment](http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700/#comment-1241694377)

![Avatar for Steve
Schwartz](https://disqus.com/api/users/avatars/test-npg-f292d097640f0b326728e39937f3e7ef.jpg)

Steve Schwartz • 2014-02-12 07:36 PM

A critical aspect of p-values, and hypothesis testing under a
frequentist framework more generally, that is not addressed by this
column, is that these techniques were developed and originally
implemented in the setting where random error is the only (or at least
dominant) reason why a particular study might not yield the correct
answer. In the setting of non-experimental research, where the
"exposure" or study condition has not been randomly assigned, whether
the study yields the true relationship has far more to do with biases in
measurement of key variables, in the selection of study subjects, and in
accounting for confounding or similar relationships among variables.
Neither p-values nor confidence intervals measure these features of a
study. But because p-values and confidence intervals are easy to
produce, and measures of many non-random biases are not easy to make,
the statistical indices have become the coin of the scientific realm in
research designs such as observational studies where they were not
originally intended to be used.

-   [Share to
    Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A+critical+aspect+of+p-values%2C+and+hypothesis+testing+under+a+frequentist+framework+more+generally%2C+that+is+not+addressed+by+this+column%2C+is+that+these+techniques+were+developed+and+originally+implemented+in+the+setting+where+random+error+is+the+only+%28or+at+least+dominant%29+reason+why+a+particular+study+might+not+yield+the+correct+answer.+In+the+setting+of+non-experimental+research%2C+where+the+%22exposure%22+or+study+condition+has+not+been+randomly+assigned%2C+whether+the+study+yields+the+true+relationship+has+far+more+to+do+with+biases+in+measurement+of+key+variables%2C+in+the+selection+of+study+subjects%2C+and+in+accounting+for+confounding+or+similar+relationships+among+variables.+Neither+p-values+nor+confidence+intervals+measure+these+features+of+a+study.+But+because+p-values+and+confidence+intervals+are+easy+to+produce%2C+and+measures+of+many+non-random+biases+are+not+easy+to+make%2C+the+statistical+indices+have+become+the+coin+of+the+scientific+realm+in+research+designs+such+as+observational+studies+where+they+were+not+originally+intended+to+be+used.&url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700%23comment-1241632908)
    [Share to
    Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700%23comment-1241632908)
    [Share link to this
    comment](http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700/#comment-1241632908)

![Avatar for H
T](https://disqus.com/api/users/avatars/test-npg-188251136dfaa9a0f530fc73bb24946e.jpg)

H T • 2014-02-12 06:16 PM

This article serves as a welcome reminder of the many fallacies that
still bely modern scientific research. However, I feel it could use a
bit more balance in the context of reproducibility. In the paragraph
where Motyl's p-value of 0.01 is revisited, the probability of
replicating this result at a 'significant' (p < 0.05) level is cited as
only 73%. It would have been useful to clarify that this is 'less than
expected' becasuse: (1) there is a chance that the initial result is a
false-positive; and (2) there is an appreciable probability that
repeating the test may produce a false negative result even if the
hypothesis is true. Hence, this is not just about the limits of p-value,
but also about the limits of relying on a single experimental replicate.

-   [Share to
    Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This+article+serves+as+a+welcome+reminder+of+the+many+fallacies+that+still+bely+modern+scientific+research.+However%2C+I+feel+it+could+use+a+bit+more+balance+in+the+context+of+reproducibility.+In+the+paragraph+where+Motyl%27s+p-value+of+0.01+is+revisited%2C+the+probability+of+replicating+this+result+at+a+%27significant%27+%28p+%26lt%3B+0.05%29+level+is+cited+as+only+73%25.+It+would+have+been+useful+to+clarify+that+this+is+%27less+than+expected%27+becasuse%3A+%281%29+there+is+a+chance+that+the+initial+result+is+a+false-positive%3B+and+%282%29+there+is+an+appreciable+probability+that+repeating+the+test+may+produce+a+false+negative+result+even+if+the+hypothesis+is+true.+Hence%2C+this+is+not+just+about+the+limits+of+p-value%2C+but+also+about+the+limits+of+relying+on+a+single+experimental+replicate.&url=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700%23comment-1241501913)
    [Share to
    Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700%23comment-1241501913)
    [Share link to this
    comment](http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700/#comment-1241501913)

See other News & Comment articles from [*Nature*](/news)
--------------------------------------------------------

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/atom-circuits-a-step-closer-1.14709)

    #### Atom circuits a step closer

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15548.1392230672!/image/nature12958-f2a.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/nature12958-f2a.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/laser-fusion-experiment-extracts-net-energy-from-fuel-1.14710)

    #### Laser fusion experiment extracts net energy from fuel

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15547.1392229653!/image/1.14710.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/1.14710.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/lifespans-predictable-at-early-age-1.14712)

    #### Lifespans predictable at early age

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15550.1392228701!/image/1.14712ii.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/1.14712ii.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/ancient-genome-stirs-ethics-debate-1.14698)

    #### Ancient genome stirs ethics debate

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15509.1392132740!/image/online%20DSCN0762%20reduced.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/online%20DSCN0762%20reduced.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/uk-rolls-out-terror-attack-plan-1.14696)

    #### UK rolls out terror-attack plan

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15508.1392133823!/image/WEB_Decontamination.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/WEB_Decontamination.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/seven-days-7-13-february-2014-1.14695)

    #### Seven days: 7–13 February 2014

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15536.1392132818!/image/7-ivory.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/7-ivory.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/india-kicks-off-fellowship-for-top-visiting-scientists-1.14703)

    #### India kicks off fellowship for top visiting scientists

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15545.1392215216!/image/900px-Flag_of_India.svg%20copy.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/900px-Flag_of_India.svg%20copy.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/carbon-sequestration-managing-forests-in-uncertain-times-1.14687)

    #### Carbon sequestration: Managing forests in uncertain times

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15454.1392059192!/image/Tree1.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/Tree1.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700)

    #### Scientific method: Statistical errors

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15481.1392118822!/image/pvalue_art.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/pvalue_art.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/medication-the-smart-pill-oversell-1.14701)

    #### Medication: The smart-pill oversell

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15496.1392118300!/image/Pill-bottle.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/Pill-bottle.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/science-at-the-sharp-end-of-oppressive-politics-1.14694)

    #### Science at the sharp end of oppressive politics

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15520.1392126994!/image/WV.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/WV.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/mapping-pinpoints-turtles-danger-zones-1.14705)

    #### Mapping pinpoints turtles' danger zones

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15524.1392159235!/image/WEB_BBT37W.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/WEB_BBT37W.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/down-s-syndrome-discovery-dispute-resurfaces-in-france-1.14690)

    #### Down's syndrome discovery dispute resurfaces in France

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15472.1392141482!/image/1.14690ii.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/1.14690ii.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/medicine-gets-up-close-and-personal-1.14702)

    #### Medicine gets up close and personal

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15534.1392131822!/image/Lee-HoodThumb.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/Lee-HoodThumb.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/nih-makes-wary-return-to-india-1.14699)

    #### NIH makes wary return to India

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15511.1392131477!/image/WEB_Indian-Trials.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/WEB_Indian-Trials.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/iconic-island-study-on-its-last-legs-1.14697)

    #### Iconic island study on its last legs

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15510.1392129912!/image/WEB_Isle-Royale.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/WEB_Isle-Royale.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/crowd-funded-hiv-vaccine-project-sparks-debate-1.14675)

    #### Crowd-funded HIV vaccine project sparks debate

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15439.1392052307!/image/1.14675.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/1.14675.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/uk-absolutely-committed-to-reducing-animals-used-in-research-1.14688)

    #### UK 'absolutely committed' to reducing animals used in research

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15468.1391799642!/image/WEB_rexfeatures_1107007a.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/WEB_rexfeatures_1107007a.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/diuretic-drug-prevents-autism-in-mice-and-rats-1.14683)

    #### Diuretic drug prevents autism in mice and rats

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15450.1391714366!/image/1.14683.jpg_gen/derivatives/box_118/1.14683.jpg)

-   [](http://www.nature.com/news/china-becomes-world-s-third-largest-producer-of-research-articles-1.14684)

    #### China becomes world’s third-largest producer of research articles

    ![image](/polopoly_fs/7.15451.1391700508!/image/open-access.png_gen/derivatives/box_118/open-access.png)

Top Story
---------

![Graphene](/polopoly_fs/7.15471.1392037307!/sitegraphics/4006833896.jpg_gen/derivatives/default/4006833896.jpg)

### [Graphene conducts electricity ten times better than expected](http://www.nature.com/news/graphene-conducts-electricity-ten-times-better-than-expected-1.14676)

Carbon layers grown on silicon carbide conduct electricity even better
than theory predicted.

Social Media Box - AML
----------------------

-   [E-alert](http://www.nature.com/news/ealert-intermediate-page.html)
-   [RSS](http://feeds.nature.com/NatureNewsComment)
-   [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/NatureNews)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/naturenews)

[Close](#) [Follow @naturenews](https://twitter.com/naturenews)

[![Advertisment](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/ad/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;ptile=2;sz=300x100;pos=right;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=6116984884372048?)](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/jump/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;ptile=2;sz=300x100;pos=right;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=6116984884372048?)

Top Content - Article Page
--------------------------

Recent
------

1.  [Atom circuits a step closer](http://www.nature.com/news/atom-circuits-a-step-closer-1.14709)
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Nature 12 February 2014

2.  [Laser fusion experiment extracts net energy from fuel](http://www.nature.com/news/laser-fusion-experiment-extracts-net-energy-from-fuel-1.14710)
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Nature 12 February 2014

3.  [Lifespans predictable at early age](http://www.nature.com/news/lifespans-predictable-at-early-age-1.14712)
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Nature 12 February 2014

4.  [Books in brief](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v506/n7487/full/506157a.html)
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Nature 12 February 2014

5.  [Q&A: Acoustic archaeologist](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v506/n7487/full/506158a.html)
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Nature 12 February 2014

Read
----

1.  ### [Acid bath offers easy path to stem cells](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/505596a)

    Nature 29 Jan 2014

2.  ### [Graphene conducts electricity ten times better than expected](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14676)

    Nature 06 Feb 2014

3.  ### [Stephen Hawking: 'There are no black holes'](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14583)

    Nature 24 Jan 2014

4.  ### [Quantum cloud simulates magnetic monopole](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14612)

    Nature 29 Jan 2014

5.  ### [First monkeys with customized mutations born](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14611)

    Nature 30 Jan 2014

[View
all](http://www.nature.com/news/top-content-article-page-7.799?article=1.14700&tab=7.801)

Commented
---------

1.  ### [Climate change: The case of the missing heat](/doifinder/10.1038/505276a)

    Nature 15 Jan 2014 [383
    comments](/doifinder/10.1038/505276a#comments)

2.  ### [Researchers question rescued polar expedition](/doifinder/10.1038/505270a)

    Nature 15 Jan 2014 [138
    comments](/doifinder/10.1038/505270a#comments)

3.  ### [Stephen Hawking questions nature of black holes](/doifinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14583)

    Nature 24 Jan 2014 [100
    comments](/doifinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14583#comments)

4.  ### [Development: Time to leave GDP behind](/doifinder/10.1038/505283a)

    Nature 15 Jan 2014 [24
    comments](/doifinder/10.1038/505283a#comments)

5.  ### [Stem-cell company in crisis](/doifinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14591)

    Nature 25 Jan 2014 [13
    comments](/doifinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14591#comments)

[View
all](http://www.nature.com/news/top-content-article-page-7.799?article=1.14700&tab=7.11333)

Emailed
-------

1.  ### [Stephen Hawking: 'There are no black holes'](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14583)

    Nature 24 Jan 2014

2.  ### [Acid bath offers easy path to stem cells](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/505596a)

    Nature 29 Jan 2014

3.  ### [Beijing smog contains witches' brew of microbes](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14640)

    Nature 31 Jan 2014

4.  ### [Antioxidants speed cancer in mice](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14606)

    Nature 29 Jan 2014

5.  ### [First monkeys with customized mutations born](http://www.nature.com/uidfinder/10.1038/nature.2014.14611)

    Nature 30 Jan 2014

[View
all](http://www.nature.com/news/top-content-article-page-7.799?article=1.14700&tab=7.12107)

[![Advertisment](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/ad/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;ptile=3;sz=300x250;pos=right;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=5731107700968406?)](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/jump/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;ptile=3;sz=300x250;pos=right;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=5731107700968406?)

[![Advertisment](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/ad/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;ptile=4;sz=160x600;pos=right;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=9022967559800108?)](//ad.doubleclick.net/N285/jump/newsnature.com/article;abr=!webtv;artid=506150a;ptile=4;sz=160x600;pos=right;submeta=npg_subject_705;submeta=npg_subject_308;submeta=npg_subject_479;submeta=npg_subject_276;ord=9022967559800108?)

Science jobs from nature jobs
-----------------------------

-   ### [Post doctoral fellow - Bioinformatic studies on membrane bound proteins](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs/345600-post-doctoral-fellow-bioinformatic-studies-on-membrane-bound-proteins)

    Uppsala University

-   ### [Faculty and Postdoctoral Positions at the Center for Quantitative Biology](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs/346539-faculty-and-postdoctoral-positions-at-the-center-for-quantitative-biology)

    Peking University (PKU)

-   ### [Graduate School of Chemistry](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs/350133-graduate-school-of-chemistry)

    Westfalischen Wilhelms-Universitat Munster

-   ### [Gastroenterologist](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs/351225-gastroenterologist)

    Benefis Hospitals

-   ### [Tier 1 Canada Research Chair Position- Quantitative Medical Imaging](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs/358429-tier-1-canada-research-chair-position-quantitative-medical-imaging)

    University of British Columbia

-   [Post a Free
    Job](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/orders/new)
-   [More Science Jobs](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs)

-   Nature
-   ISSN: 0028-0836
-   EISSN: 1476-4687

-   [About NPG](/npg)
-   [Contact NPG](/npg_/contact)
-   [Accessibility statement](/info/accessibility_statement.html)
-   [Help](/help)

-   [Privacy policy](/info/privacy.html)
-   [Use of cookies](/info/cookies.html)
-   [Legal notice](/info/legal_notice.html)
-   [Terms](/info/tandc.html)

-   [Nature jobs](/naturejobs)
-   [Nature Asia](http://www.natureasia.com)
-   [Nature Education](/scitable)
-   [RSS web feeds](/webfeeds)

-   [About **Nature**](/nature/about/index.html)
-   [Contact **Nature**](/nature/about/contact/index.html)
-   [About the Editors](/nature/about/editors/index.html)
-   [**Nature** awards](/nature/awards/index.html)

Search Go

[© 2014 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers
Limited. All Rights Reserved.](/info/copyright_statement.html) partner
of [AGORA, HINARI, OARE, INASP, CrossRef and
COUNTER](/info/partners.html)

![image](//statse.webtrendslive.com/dcs0zztfg00000s969s37qoal_2f6z/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=10.2.55)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.nature.com/news/scientific-method-statistical-errors-1.14700
