[Parallel Universe](http://www.paralleluniverse.co)
[](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co)

### The Parallel Universe Blog

January 28, 2014

Writing Interactive Web Applications with Web Actors
====================================================

The [actor model](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model) defined by
Carl Hewitt and then evolved and popularized (well, relatively
popularized) by the Erlang programming language, has become a very
appropriate choice for designing certain kinds of software. Those groups
of isolated processes communicating with one another by passing messages
back and forth are an excellent way to program applications that exploit
concurrency well for performance and scalability, respond quickly to
barrages of realtime events, embrace distributed environments, and
recover well from (quite expected) unexpected failures. They do all this
while being relatively simple to understand and compose, and they model
many problem domains quite naturally.

With many modern web applications becoming more interactive, responding
to events as they happen and pushing updates at interactive speeds, the
actor model is becoming more and more suitable for programming the web.
Especially with new communication models like WebSockets, it seems like
actors and the web are made for each other.

[Comsat](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat) is a
[new](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/01/22/introducing-comsat/)
open-source product that integrates
[Quasar](https://github.com/puniverse/quasar), a lightweight-threads and
actors library for the JVM, with web technologies. It can run Servlets
and REST services in fibers rather than OS threads for scalability, but
it also has an API called Web Actors that turns HTTP-based
communications into actor-based interaction. This makes managing state,
recovering from failure, and hot code upgrade simple for web
applications, while giving them great performance and scalability.

Declaring a Web Actor
---------------------

Let’s dissect the web actor example, included in the [Comsat
examples](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples) project (the
full source code can be found
[here](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/blob/master/comsat-examples-webactors/src/main/java/co/paralleluniverse/example/comsatwebactors/MyWebActor.java):

    @WebActor(httpUrlPatterns = {"/webactor", "/send1", "/send2", "/sse"}, webSocketUrlPatterns = {"/ws"})
    public class MyWebActor extends BasicActor<Object, Void> {
       // ...
    }

A web actor is an actor that receives messages from a web client. The
actor is attached to an HTTP session, and to as many web sockets as
necessary. While it is possible (and in some circumstances, recommended)
to spawn a web actor and to attach it to a session manually after some
authentication process, it is simple to annotate a class as a web actor,
and let Comsat find it, load it, and attach it to every new session
automatically (an actors consumes very little resources; it is only
about 500 bytes in size). That’s exacly what line 1 does: it declares
that the class (which must be an implementation of a Quasar actor) is a
web actor that responds to HTTP messages sent to any of the listed four
resources, as well as to WebSockets with the given URL pattern. Again,
the actor is attached to a single HTTP session.

Currenlty, Comsat runs web actors on Servlet containers like Tomcat and
Jetty, but we plan on providing support for lower level servers like
Netty and Undertow.

Now let’s look at the main actor loop in the `doRun` method:

    @Override
    protected Void doRun() throws InterruptedException, SuspendExecution {
        if (!initialized) {
           // ...
        }

        for (;;) {
            Object message = receive(5000, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS);
            // -------- HTTP request -------- 
            if (message instanceof HttpRequest) {
              // ...
            } 
            // -------- WebSocket/SSE opened -------- 
            else if (message instanceof WebStreamOpened) {
                // ...
            } 
            // -------- WebSocket message received -------- 
            else if (message instanceof WebDataMessage) {
                // ...
            } 
            // -------- Timeout -------- 
            else if (message == null) {
                // ...
            }

            checkCodeSwap();
        }
    }

After some initialization, we enter an infinite loop in which we receive
a message and process it. You can have as many `receive` calls as you
want, and even what is known as “selective receive” where you block
until a specific message arrives; this lets you handle messages in the
order you’re prepared to, not the order they arrive over the wire, which
is useful, say, when getting messages from several sources.

If a message is not received within 500 ms, we run some timeout code
that pushes an update to our WebSocket and SSE clients.

Handling a Simple HTTP Request
------------------------------

Now let’s look at how we process a simple HTTP request:

    if (message instanceof HttpRequest) {
       HttpRequest msg = (HttpRequest) message;
       // ...
        String response = BlockingCallsExample.executeSomeSql(ds)
                + BlockingCallsExample.callSomeRS(httpClient)
                + BlockingCallsExample.doSleep();

        // reply back to the sender
        msg.getFrom().send(new HttpResponse(self(),
                ok(msg, buildHtml(response, msg, i)).setContentType("text/html")
                .addCookie(cookie("userCookie", "value").build())));
      // ...
    }

We build the response after executing a SQL statement, calling some
other web service, and sleeping a bit. This is just to show how simple
it is to run blocking operations in web actors (and Comsat in general).
But these calls do not block the current OS thread – only the fiber
running the actor, and you can run hundreds of thousands and even
millions of fibers on a single JVM instance. You get the exact same
scalability as you would using an asynchronous, callback-based API, but
the code stays simple (under the covers this works because Quasar
schedules threads with a state of the art work-stealing scheduler, and
so can block and unblock fibers much faster than the OS can schedule
fullblown threads; read our previous blog posts if you’re interested in
the details).

The HTTP request is received as an immutable message, with a `from`
property containing the sender actor. In the case of web actors, the
actors sending the web messages represent the web client, but we can
interact with them as we would with any actor, as we’ll see later.

To send the response, we simply send an `HttpResponse` message back to
the sender of the request. In this example, we also add a cookie, just
for fun.

WebSocket
---------

Now let’s look at WebSockets:

    // -------- WebSocket/SSE opened -------- 
    else if (message instanceof WebStreamOpened) {
        WebStreamOpened msg = (WebStreamOpened) message;
        watch(msg.getFrom()); // watch the socket's "actor"
        // ...
        listeners.add(p);

        p.send(new WebDataMessage(self(), "Welcome. " + listeners.size() + " listeners"));
    } 
    // -------- WebSocket message received -------- 
    else if (message instanceof WebDataMessage) {
        WebDataMessage msg = (WebDataMessage) message;

        for (SendPort listener : listeners)
            listener.send(new WebDataMessage(self(), "local counter:" + i + " data:" + msg.getStringBody().toUpperCase()));
    }

Whenever a WebSocket is opened, our web actor receives a
`WebStreamOpened` message from an actor representing the socket. In line
6 we add that socket as a listener for messages we’ll push to it later,
but before that, in line 4, we `watch` that actor. “Watching” is an
important actor mechanism for detecting and responding to failure. If
the socket were to close for whatever reason, or some other error should
occur over that connection, that virtual actor representing the socket
will die, and when it does, actors “watching”, like our own web actor,
will receive a message notifying us of the event.

In lines 11 through 15 we’ve received a WebSocket message, and we push a
message of our own to all the listeners: web sockets and SSE streams.

Server-Sent Events (SSE)
------------------------

SSE, or Server-Sent Events, is an HTML5 stnadard, supported by most
modern browsers, for pushing discrete messages to the web client,
without it sending new HTTP requests for each one. An SSE stream is
initiated with an HTTP request; then, each event message is written to
the response stream and flushed, only the messages need to be encoded
according to the SSE standard.

An SSE stream is initiated by a regular HTTP request. Let’s go back and
look at the code we’ve left out in the HTTP request handling section:

    if (message instanceof HttpRequest) {
        HttpRequest msg = (HttpRequest) message;
       if (!msg.getRequestURI().endsWith("/sse")) {
           // ...
           } // -------- request for SSE -------- 
           else {
               HttpResponse response = new HttpResponse(self(), SSE.startSSE(msg));
               msg.getFrom().send(response);
           }
      }
    }

All we do is reply with a `SSE.startSSE()` message, which will result in
a new actor being created, which will send us the `WebStreamOpened`,
just like a WebSocket. Let’s go back and look at the left out pieces:

    // -------- WebSocket/SSE opened -------- 
    else if (message instanceof WebStreamOpened) {
        WebStreamOpened msg = (WebStreamOpened) message;
        watch(msg.getFrom());

        SendPort<WebDataMessage> p = msg.getFrom();
        
        if (msg instanceof HttpStreamOpened)
            p = wrapAsSSE(p);

        listeners.add(p);
        p.send(new WebDataMessage(self(), "Welcome. " + listeners.size() + " listeners"));
    } 

In line 8 we recognize that this is an SSE stream rather then a
WebSocket. Now, SSE messages need to be formatted according to the SSE
standard, but we still want to treat an SSE listener just like a
WebSocket listener in the code, so in line 9 we call the `wrapAsSSE`
method, which applies a mapping transformation to the actor representing
the SSE stream (actually, the transformation works on Quasar *channels*,
but actors are also channels):

    private SendPort<WebDataMessage> wrapAsSSE(SendPort<WebDataMessage> actor) {
        return Channels.map(actor, new Function<WebDataMessage, WebDataMessage>() {
            public WebDataMessage apply(WebDataMessage f) {
                return new WebDataMessage(f.getFrom(), SSE.event(f.getStringBody()));
            }
        });
    }

The `SSE.event` method in line 4 encodes the message body as a
well-formed SSE event message, and that’s all there is to it.

Detecting Failure
-----------------

We mentioned earlier how we `watch` those virtual actors for failure. If
any WebSocket or SSE actor were to fail (say, the connection has been
reset), that actor will die and send us an `ExitMessage`, which is what
is known by Quasar actors as a *lifecycle message*. Those messages
aren’t normally returned by `receive` but are handled by a special
method:

    @Override
    protected Object handleLifecycleMessage(LifecycleMessage m) {
        if (m instanceof ExitMessage) {
            ExitMessage em = (ExitMessage) m;
            System.out.println("Actor " + em.getActor() + " has died.");
            boolean res = listeners.remove(em.getActor());
            System.out.println((res ? "Successfuly" : "Unsuccessfuly") + " removed listener for actor " + em.getActor());
        }
        return super.handleLifecycleMessage(m);
    }

So when a connection fails, the actor representing it will die, our web
actor will detect that, and remove the actor from its list of listeners.

Hot Code Swapping
-----------------

The actor model helps build application that suffer no downtime, but
fault-tolerance is only part of the picture, as downtime is often
incurred as a result of maintenace operations, like code upgrade. Being
able to upgrade code without stopping the application and without losing
state is a very useful ability supported by Quasar actors, and therefore
by Comsat’s web actors.

Let’s go back and look at the actor’s `doRun` method:

    @Override
    protected Void doRun() throws InterruptedException, SuspendExecution {
        if (!initialized) { // necessary for hot code swapping, as this method might be called again after a code swap
           // ...
        }

        for (;;) {
            Object message = receive(5000, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS);
            
            // ... handle message

            checkCodeSwap();
        }
    }

When an actor is at an appropriate state (what that means depends on
what the actor is doing and is up to you to decide), it may check if an
upgrade has been loaded with the `checkCodeSwap()` method. If it has,
the actor will be replaced with a new version that retains all state
(though it’s free to add or remove fields), and the `doRun` method will
get called again on the new version. Other actors are oblivious to the
code swap, and no messages will be lost in the process. (More complex
actors might choose to make use of *behaviors* (a term taken from Erlang
OTP) that are templates for common types of actors, which include fully
automated hot code-swapping with no need to call `checkCodeSwap()`
explicitely)

A new code version is nothing but a simple jar file that contains the
upgraded code for whichever classes you wish to upgrade. You can then
tell the application to load the upgrade module with a JMX operation
(using any JMX console, like [VisualVM](http://visualvm.java.net/)), or
you can designate a directory on the file system that Quasar will watch,
and any jar you put in that directory while the application runs will be
automatically loaded into the program. You can also roll back upgrades
simply by deleting the modules from that directory or by unloading them
via JMX.

You can read more about Quasar’s hot code swapping in the
[documenation](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/quasar/).

From an Example to a Real Application
-------------------------------------

Of course, this is a rather simple example. A more interesting web actor
would likely spawn and/or interact with other actors. It is free to
forward whatever web messages it receives as they are no different from
any other message exchanged between actors.

We’ve only barely touched Quasar’s full capabilities which include
supervisor hierarchies for automated fault tolerance, and other Erlang
OTP-like functionality, as well as Go-like CSP channels and “reactive
extensions”.

To learn more, feel free to browse through the
[Comsat](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/comsat/) and
[Quasar](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/quasar/) documentation, and to
play with [the examples](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples).

To see what’s possible with Comsat and Quasar, you can play our simple
MMO, [Web
Spaceships](http://demo.paralleluniverse.co:8080/comsat-examples-spaceships/login).
Every player controls a spaceship that can fight other player- and
computer-controlled spaceships. All processing is done on the server,
with user actions being sent to the server and updates on the location
of the surrounding spaceships sent from the server all through
WebSockets. The game will be the topic of a future post, but in the
meantime you’re free to examine its the source code
[here](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/tree/master/comsat-examples-spaceships),
or start playing:

[![Web Spaceships
screenshot](/images/webships_screenshot.png)](http://demo.paralleluniverse.co:8080/comsat-examples-spaceships/login)

Join our mailing list
---------------------

Sign up to receive news and updates.

Tags: [quasar](/tagged/quasar), [comsat](/tagged/comsat)
--------------------------------------------------------

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

-   [Products](#)
    -   [Comsat](http://paralleluniverse.co/comsat/)
    -   [Quasar](http://paralleluniverse.co/quasar/)
    -   [Spacebase](http://paralleluniverse.co/spacebase/)
    -   [Galaxy](http://paralleluniverse.co/galaxy/)

-   [Support](http://paralleluniverse.co/support/)
-   [Documentation](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/)
-   [Company](http://paralleluniverse.co/about/)
-   [Blog](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/01/28/web-actors-1/
