[Parallel Universe](http://www.paralleluniverse.co)
[](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co)

### The Parallel Universe Blog

February 13, 2014

Writing an MMO with Web Actors
==============================

A couple of weeks ago we launched
[Comsat](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat), a set of libraries
implementing standard Java web-realted APIs (servlet, JAX-RS, JDBC etc.)
using [Quasar](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat) fibers. The main
benefit of using fibers as the foundation for a web application is the
performance and scalability of the asynchronous (callback-based)
programming model combined with the simplicity of the threaded model.
I’ve discussed this in detail in a [previous blog
post](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/04/littles-law/).

In addition to fiber-based, standard API implementations,
[Comsat](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat) includes an optional API
called Web Actors, that [lets you write interactive web applications
using the actor
model](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/01/28/web-actors-1/). To see
how these web actors might be used in production, we have ported our
[spaceships
demo](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2013/10/16/spaceships2/) from a
standalone simulation to an MMO:

[![Web Spaceships
screenshot](/images/webships_screenshot.png)](http://demo.paralleluniverse.co:8080/comsat-examples-spaceships/login)

The code for this game is found
[here](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/tree/master/comsat-examples-spaceships/src/main/java/co/paralleluniverse/webspaceships)
as part of the [Comsat
examples](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples) project. Mind
you, we are neither UI nor game designers, so please forgive the crude
graphics and gameplay. Behind the scenes, however, a lot is going on.
Every spacehip is running its simulation in a fiber (lightweight thread)
of its own, updating its location in an in-memory spatial database, and
querying the database for its surroundings many times per second. All
simulation is done strictly on the server, which talks to the client via
WebSockets. There are ships controlled by players as well as NPC ships.
The server sends JSON updates to the clients with the state of the
spaceships in their vicinity. The client merely renders the graphics (in
WebGL) and performs simple extrapolation of the server state to provide
smoother animation; it also sends command to control the player’s ship.

Because all processing is done on the server, user experience is heavily
affected by your network latency (which is displayed at the top left of
the screen). A real game will employ techniques like dead-reckoning to
hide that latency.

We’re not going to discuss the code in depth. Instead, this short post
will give a broad overview of the game architecture in two parts: the
first will discuss how the client-server communication is done using Web
Actors, and the second will discuss some core aspects of the simulation
architecture.

Part 1 – Communicating with the Real World
------------------------------------------

When a new player first accesses the game’s page, a new instance of
[this web
actor](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/blob/master/comsat-examples-spaceships/src/main/java/co/paralleluniverse/webspaceships/SpaceshipConnectorActor.java)
will be created. The web actor is responsible for all communication with
the client. Messages may arrive in the form of HTTP request (when the
player logs in), or websocket messages for game data. Whatever kind of
message, it is all handled by the actor, which manages the player’s
server-side state.

This is the web actor’s main loop:

    @Override
    protected Void doRun() throws InterruptedException, SuspendExecution {
        ActorRef<WebDataMessage> client = null;
        String loginName = "empty";

        for (;;) {
            Object message = receive();
            if (message instanceof HttpRequest) {
                HttpRequest msg = (HttpRequest) message;
                loginName = msg.getParameter("name");
                if (loginName == null) // not logged in - reply with the login page
                    msg.getFrom().send(new HttpResponse(self(), ok(msg, nameFormHtml())));
                else { // logged in - reply with the game page
                    loginName = truncate(loginName.replaceAll("[\"\'<>/\\\\]", ""), 10); // protect against js injection
                    if (spaceships.getControlledAmmount().get() / spaceships.players > 0.9)
                        msg.getFrom().send(new HttpResponse(self(), ok(msg, noMoreSpaceshipsHtml())));
                    else
                        msg.getFrom().send(new HttpResponse(self(), ok(msg, gameHtml())));
                }
            } else if (message instanceof WebSocketOpened) {
                client = ((WebSocketOpened) message).getFrom();
                watch(client);
            } else if (message instanceof WebDataMessage) {
                WebDataMessage msg = (WebDataMessage) message;
                if (spaceship == null) {
                    spaceship = spaceships.spawnControlledSpaceship(client, "c." + loginName);
                    if (spaceship == null) // too many players
                        break;

                    watch(spaceship);
                }
                if (msg.getFrom() == client)
                    spaceship.send(msg); // pipe messages from the client to the spaceship
            } else if (message instanceof ExitMessage) {
                ActorRef actor = ((ExitMessage) message).getActor();
                if (actor == spaceship) { // the spaceship is dead
                    spaceships.notifyControlledSpaceshipDied();
                    spaceship = null;
                } else { // the client is dead
                    if (spaceship != null)
                        spaceship.send(new WebDataMessage(self(), "exit"));
                }
                break;
            }
        }

        return null;
    }

The web actor communicates with two other actors: one representing the
client browser, and one for the player’s spaceship. It is `watch`ing
both so that it’s notified with an `ExitMessage` if either of them die
for whatever reason.

Once the player is logged in, a new spaceship is spawned, and all
further events received from the client are simply passed to the ship
actor. The client actor is passed to the ship actor’s constructor, so
that the ship can directly send messages to the client without going
through the web actor.

The [spaceship
actor](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/blob/master/comsat-examples-spaceships/src/main/java/co/paralleluniverse/webspaceships/Spaceship.java)
is used both for player spaceships and NPC ships; for NPCs, the `client`
field is `null`. Whenever the spaceship receives a message from the
client it replies with a JSON update containing the ship’s state as well
as that of all neighboring ships. Such an update is also sent to the
ship’s client every 100ms.

We didn’t use any HTML template libraries or any JSON marshalling
libraries because for our game, both the little HTML we needed, and
whatever JSON messages we used were trivial; of course in your own
application you might decide to make use of either.

Part 2 – Simulating the Virtual World
-------------------------------------

The game world simulation is pretty much the same as in the [standalone
demo](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2013/10/16/spaceships2/) (you can
follow the link for a more in-depth discussion of how concurrency is
used in the simulation), but here I’d like to talk some more about
modeling a domain with actors and an in-memory database.

Rich Hickey is right. Programming is all about [controlling and
communicating
state](http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Are-We-There-Yet-Rich-Hickey).
But because we’re talking about a *game-world simulation*, let’s see how
state is managed in the real world. In the real world, I guess you could
talk about private and public state. Private state is what I know about
myself. If you want to know what I know – my name, for example – you
have to ask me. There is also public state, which is what you can know
about me without actively asking. For example, my location is part of my
public state, known to all who can see me. Of course, I can choose to
share other information publicly, for example by printing my name on my
T-shirt, which will make it known to people who can see me without them
asking me. Public state is obtained without me actively participating in
an exchange; alternatively, you can think about public state as
something I constantly broadcast to the entire world or to a portion of
it. Also, the owner of the private state decides what to share and who
to share it with, while when it comes to public state, it is the
consumer that decides what information to retrieve.

To continue this example, we see there are more differences between
public and private state. If you’re nearby and can see me, you know my
location instantaenously (well, at the speed of light). But if you’re
asking exactly where I am on the phone, by the time I tell you and
you’ve processed my reply, I could have moved.

In our simulation, actors manage private state. Every ship is an actor,
running concurrently on its own fiber (lightweight thread). You can tell
it things (like, “I just shot you”), or ask it things by sending it
messages. The actor model, however, is not enough. I’d say it’s hardly
ever enough for any application: you also need public state. Heck, even
Erlang has ETS tables.

But while the actor model takes care of any concurrency issues we may
have managing private state, public state is more tricky, as it can be
accessed at any time, even concurrently with updates. One solution is
storing public state in persistent (immutable) data strcutures. This is
a fine approach, and the one used by Clojure atoms and agents. It has,
however, two drawbacks. One, it tends to generate garbage (memory) of
the worst kind – one that’s neither short lived nor particularly
long-lived . Two, and more importantly, it does not allow concurrent
modifications (i.e. it supports only on update at a time). So for public
state, our game uses
[SpaceBase](http://www.paralleluniverse.co/spacebase/), our in-memory,
concurrent spatial database. Transactions (including queries), provide
instantaneus (in virtual time) access to shared public state.

Every spaceship actor, holds its private state in its class fields,
while its public state is kept in the [`state`
variable](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/blob/master/comsat-examples-spaceships/src/main/java/co/paralleluniverse/webspaceships/Spaceship.java#L78),
which is of type `Record<SpaceshipState>`. It is this record that is
[inserted into the
database](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/blob/master/comsat-examples-spaceships/src/main/java/co/paralleluniverse/webspaceships/Spaceship.java#L139),
wrapped by an instance of `TransactionalRecord`.

The `Record` class provides a standard API for a simple, mutable data
record. It is very fast (about as fast as direct field access), but it
allows us to protect a record instance with decorators like
`TransactionalRecord`, that control access to the record’s data.
`TransactionalRecord` will make sure that state records returned by
database queries are only read and/or modified within a transaction.

For example, when an NPC spaceship is [searching for
targets](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples/blob/master/comsat-examples-spaceships/src/main/java/co/paralleluniverse/webspaceships/Spaceship.java#L242),
it performs this query that returns the public state records of the
ships that are in our radar range:

    try (ResultSet<Record<SpaceshipState>> rs = 
          global.sb.query(
            new RadarQuery(state.get($x), state.get($y), state.get($vx), state.get($vy), 
                           toRadians(30), MAX_SEARCH_RANGE))) {
        Record<SpaceshipState> nearestShip = null;
        double minRange2 = MAX_SEARCH_RANGE_SQUARED;
        for (Record<SpaceshipState> s : rs.getResultReadOnly()) {
            final double dx = s.get($x) - state.get($x);
            final double dy = s.get($y) - state.get($y);

            final double rng2 = dx * dx + dy * dy;
            if (rng2 > 100 & rng2 <= minRange2) { // not me and not too close
                minRange2 = rng2;
                nearestShip = s;
            }
        }
        if (nearestShip != null)
            lockOnTarget(nearestShip);
    }

Any attempt to store the state records and access them outside a
transaction, will result in an immediate runtime exception.

Get Started Now
---------------

First, go play the game
[here](http://demo.paralleluniverse.co:8080/comsat-examples-spaceships/login).

Then feel free to browse through the
[Comsat](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/comsat/) and
[Quasar](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/quasar/) documentation, and to
check out [the Comsat
examples](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat-examples).

[Discuss on Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7232188)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Join our mailing list
---------------------

Sign up to receive news and updates.

Tags: [comsat](/tagged/comsat), [quasar](/tagged/quasar), [spacebase](/tagged/spacebase)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

-   [Products](#)
    -   [Comsat](http://paralleluniverse.co/comsat/)
    -   [Quasar](http://paralleluniverse.co/quasar/)
    -   [Spacebase](http://paralleluniverse.co/spacebase/)
    -   [Galaxy](http://paralleluniverse.co/galaxy/)

-   [Support](http://paralleluniverse.co/support/)
-   [Documentation](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/)
-   [Company](http://paralleluniverse.co/about/)
-   [Blog](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/13/web-spaceships/
