[![Kalzumeus
Software](http://www.kalzumeus.com/images/kalzumeus.png)](http://www.kalzumeus.com "Patrick McKenzie (patio11) blogs on software development, marketing, and general business topics")
[Kalzumeus Software](http://www.kalzumeus.com) Patrick McKenzie
(patio11) blogs on software development, marketing, and general business
topics

-   [Blog](http://www.kalzumeus.com/blog/)
-   [Greatest Hits](http://www.kalzumeus.com/greatest-hits/)
-   [Standing Invitation](http://www.kalzumeus.com/standing-invitation/)
-   [Start Here If You’re
    New](http://www.kalzumeus.com/start-here-if-youre-new/)
-   [About](http://www.kalzumeus.com/about/)

Posted on October 28, 2011 by
[Patrick](http://www.kalzumeus.com/author/kalzumeus/ "Posts by Patrick")
in
[Uncategorized](http://www.kalzumeus.com/category/uncategorized/ "View all posts in Uncategorized")

If there was one course I could add to every engineering education, it
wouldn’t involve compilers or gates or time complexity. It would be
Realities Of Your Industry 101, because we don’t teach them and this
results in lots of unnecessary pain and suffering. This post aspires to
be README.txt for your career as a young engineer. The goal is to make
you happy, by filling in the gaps in your education regarding how the
“real world” actually works. It took me about ten years and a lot of
suffering to figure out some of this, starting from “fairly bright
engineer with low self-confidence and zero practical knowledge of
business.” I wouldn’t trust this as the definitive guide, but hopefully
it will provide value over what your college Career Center isn’t telling
you.

**90% of programming jobs are in creating Line of Business software**:
Economics 101: the price for anything (including you) is a function of
the supply of it and demand for it. Let’s talk about the demand side
first. Most software is not sold in boxes, available on the Internet, or
downloaded from the App Store. Most software is boring one-off
applications in corporations, under-girding every imaginable facet of
the global economy. It tracks expenses, it optimizes shipping costs, it
assists the accounting department in preparing projections, it helps
design new widgets, it prices insurance policies, it flags orders for
manual review by the fraud department, etc etc. *Software solves
business problems*. Software often solves business problems despite
being *soul-crushingly boring* and of *minimal technical complexity*.
For example, consider an internal travel expense reporting form. Across
a company with 2,000 employees, that might save 5,000 man-hours a year
(at an average fully-loaded cost of $50 an hour) versus handling
expenses on paper, for a savings of $250,000 a year. It *does not
matter* to the company that the reporting form is the world’s simplest
CRUD app, it only matters that it either saves the company costs or
generates additional revenue.

There are companies which create software which actually gets used by
customers, which describes almost everything that you probably think of
when you think of software. It is *unlikely that you will work at
one*unless you work towards making this happen. Even if you actually
work at one, many of the programmers there *do not work on
customer-facing software*, either.

**Engineers are hired to create business value, not to program things**:
Businesses do things for irrational and political reasons all the time
(see below), but in the main they converge on doing things which
increase revenue or reduce costs. Status in well-run businesses
generally is awarded to people who successfully take credit for doing
one of these things. (That can, but does not necessarily, entail
actually doing them.) The person who has decided to bring on one more
engineer is not doing it because they love having a geek around the
room, they are doing it because adding the geek allows them to complete
a project (or projects) which will add revenue or decrease costs.
Producing beautiful software is not a goal. Solving complex technical
problems is not a goal. Writing bug-free code is not a goal. Using sexy
programming languages is not a goal. Add revenue. Reduce costs. Those
are your only goals.

Peter Drucker — you haven’t heard of him, but he is a prophet among
people who sign checks — came up with the terms Profit Center and Cost
Center. Profit Centers are the part of an organization that bring in the
bacon: partners at law firms, sales at enterprise software companies,
“masters of the universe” on Wall Street, etc etc. Cost Centers are,
well, everybody else. **You really want to be attached to Profit
Centers** because it will bring you higher wages, more respect, and
greater opportunities for everything of value to you. It isn’t hard: a
bright high schooler, given a paragraph-long description of a business,
can usually identify where the Profit Center is. If you want to work
there, work for that. If you can’t, either a) work elsewhere or b)
engineer your transfer after joining the company.

Engineers in particular are usually *very highly paid* Cost Centers,
which sets MBA’s optimization antennae to twitching. This is what brings
us wonderful ideas like outsourcing, which is “Let’s replace really
expensive Cost Centers who do some magic which we kinda need but don’t
really care about with less expensive Cost Centers in a lower wage
country”. (Quick sidenote: You can absolutely ignore outsourcing as a
career threat if you read the rest of this guide.) Nobody ever
outsources Profit Centers. Attempting to do so would be the setup for
MBA humor. It’s like suggesting replacing your source control system
with a bunch of copies maintained on floppy disks.

**Don’t call yourself a programmer**: “Programmer” sounds like
“anomalously high-cost peon who types some mumbo-jumbo into some other
mumbo-jumbo.” If you call yourself a programmer, someone is *already*
working on a way to get you fired. You know Salesforce, widely perceived
among engineers to be a Software as a Services company? Their motto and
sales point is “No Software”, which conveys to their actual customers
“You know those programmers you have working on your internal systems?
If you used Salesforce, you could fire half of them and pocket part of
the difference in your bonus.” (There’s nothing wrong with this, by the
way. You’re in the business of unemploying people. If you think that is
unfair, go back to school and study something that doesn’t matter.)

Instead, describe yourself by what you have accomplished for previously
employers vis-a-vis increasing revenues or reducing costs. If you have
not had the opportunity to do this yet, describe things which suggest
you have the ability to increase revenue or reduce costs, or ideas to do
so.

There are many varieties of well-paid professionals who sling code but
do not describe themselves as slinging code for a living. Quants on Wall
Street are the first and best-known example: they use computers and math
as a lever to make high-consequence decisions better and faster than an
unaided human could, and the punchline to those decisions is “our firm
make billions of dollars.” Successful quants make more in bonuses in a
good year than many equivalently talented engineers will earn in a
decade or lifetime.

Similarly, even though you might think Google sounds like a
programmer-friendly company, there are programmers and then there’s the
people who are closely tied to 1% improvements in AdWords click-through
rates. (Hint: provably worth billions of dollars.) I recently stumbled
across a web-page from the guy whose professional bio is “wrote the
backend billing code that 97% of Google’s revenue passes through.” He’s
now an angel investor (a polite synonym for “rich”).

**You are not defined by your chosen software stack**: I recently asked
via Twitter what young engineers wanted to know about careers. Many
asked how to know what programming language or stack to study. It
doesn’t matter. There you go.

Do Java programmers make more money than .NET programmers? Anyone
describing themselves as either a Java programmer or .NET programmer has
already lost, because a) they’re a programmer (you’re not, see above)
and b) they’re making themselves non-hireable for most programming jobs.
In the real world, picking up a new language takes a few weeks of effort
and after 6 to 12 months nobody will ever notice you haven’t been doing
that one for your entire career. I did back-end Big Freaking Java Web
Application development as recently as March 2010. Trust me, nobody
cares about that. If a Python shop was looking for somebody technical to
make them a pile of money, the fact that I’ve never written a line of
Python would not get held against me.

Talented engineers are rare — vastly rarer than opportunities to use
them — and it is a seller’s market for talent right now in almost every
facet of the field. Everybody at Matasano uses Ruby. If you don’t, but
are a good engineer, they’ll hire you anyway. (A good engineer has a
track record of — repeat after me — increasing revenue or decreasing
costs.) Much of Fog Creek uses the Microsoft Stack. I can’t even *spell*
ASP.NET and they’d still hire me.

There are companies with broken HR policies where lack of a buzzword
means you won’t be selected. You don’t want to work for them, but if you
really do, you can add the relevant buzzword to your resume for the
costs of a few nights and weekends, or by controlling technology choices
at your current job in such a manner that in advances your career
interests. Want to get trained on Ruby at a .NET shop? Implement a
one-off project in Ruby. Bam, you are now a professional Ruby programmer
— you coded Ruby and you took money for it. (You laugh? I did this at a
Java shop. The one-off Ruby project made the company $30,000. My boss
was, predictably, quite happy and *never even asked what produced the
deliverable*.)

**Co-workers and bosses are not usually your friends**: You will spend a
lot of time with co-workers. You may eventually become close friends
with some of them, but in general, you will move on in three years and
aside from maintaining cordial relations *you will not go out of your
way to invite them over to dinner*. They will treat you in exactly the
same way. You should be a good person to everyone you meet — it is the
moral thing to do, and as a sidenote will really help your networking —
but do not be under the delusion that everyone is your friend.

For example, at a job interview, even if you are talking to an affable
28 year old who feels like a slightly older version of you **he is in a
transaction**. You are not his friend, you are an input for an
industrial process which he is trying to buy for the company at the
lowest price. That banter about World of Warcraft is just establishing a
professional rapport, but he will (perfectly ethically) attempt to do
things that none of your actual friends would ever do, like try to talk
you down several thousand dollars in salary or guilt-trip you into
spending more time with the company when you could be spending time with
your actual friends. You will have other coworkers who — affably and
ethically — will suggest things which go against your interests, from “I
should get credit for that project you just did” (probably not phrased
in so many words) to “We should do this thing which advances my
professional growth goals rather than yours.” Don’t be surprised when
this happens.

**You radically overestimate the average skill of the competition
because of the crowd you hang around with**: Many people already
successfully employed as senior engineers cannot actually implement
[FizzBuzz](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2007/02/why-cant-programmers-program.html).
Just read it and weep. Key takeaway: you probably *are* good enough to
work at that company you think you’re not good enough for. They hire
better mortals, but they still hire mortals.

**“Read ad. Send in resume. Go to job interview. Receive offer.” is the
exception, not the typical case, for getting employment**: Most jobs are
never available publicly, just like most worthwhile candidates are not
available publicly (see
[here](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/FindingGreatDevelopers.html)).
Information about the position travels at approximately the speed of
beer, sometimes lubricated by email. The decisionmaker at a company
knows he needs someone. He tells his friends and business contacts. One
of them knows someone — family, a roommate from college, someone they
met at a conference, an ex-colleague, whatever. Introductions are made,
a meeting happens, and they achieve agreement in principle on the job
offer. *Then* the resume/HR department/formal offer dance comes about.

This is disproportionately true of jobs you actually *want* to get.
“First employee at a successful startup” has a certain cachet for a lot
of geeks, and virtually none of those got placed by sending in a cover
letter to an HR department, in part because two-man startups don’t have
enough scar tissue to form HR departments yet. (P.S. You probably don’t
want to be first employee for a startup. Be the last co-founder
instead.) Want to get a job at Googler? They have a formal process for
giving you a leg up because a Googler likes you. (They also have
multiple informal ways for a Googler who likes you an awful lot to
short-circuit that process. One example: buy the company you work for.
When you have a couple of billion lying around you have many interesting
options for solving problems.)

There are many reasons why most hiring happens privately. One is that
publicly visible job offers get spammed by hundreds of resumes
(particularly in this economy) from people who are stunningly
inappropriate for the position. The other is that other companies are
*so* bad at hiring that, if you don’t have close personal knowledge
about the candidate, you might accidentally hire a non-FizzBuzzer.

**Networking: it isn’t just for TCP packets**: Networking just means a)
meeting people who at some point can do things for you (or vice versa)
and b) making a favorable impression on them.

There are many places to meet people. Events in your industry, such as
conferences or academic symposia which get seen by non-academics, are
one. User groups are another. Keep in mind that user groups draw a very
different crowd than industry conferences and optimize accordingly.

Strive to help people. It is the right thing to do, and people are
keenly aware of who have in the past given them or theirs favors. If you
ever can’t help someone but know someone who can, pass them to the
appropriate person with a recommendation. If you do this right, two
people will be happy with you and favorably disposed to helping you out
in the future.

You can meet people over the Internet (oh God, can you), but something
in our monkey brains makes in-the-flesh meeting a bigger thing. I’ve
Internet-met a great many people who I’ve then gone on to meet in real
life. The physical handshake is a major step up in the relationship,
even when Internet-meeting lead to very consequential things like “Made
them a lot of money through good advice.” Definitely blog and
participate on your industry-appropriate watering holes like HN, but
make it out to the meetups for it.

**Academia is not like the real world**: Your GPA largely doesn’t matter
(modulo one high profile exception: a multinational advertising firm).
To the extent that it does matter, it only determines whether your
resume gets selected for job interviews. If you’re reading the rest of
this, you know that your resume isn’t the primary way to get job
interviews, so don’t spend huge amount of efforts optimizing something
that you either have sufficiently optimized already (since you’ll get
the same amount of interviews at 3.96 as you will at 3.8) or that you
don’t need at all (since you’ll get job interviews because you’re
competent at asking the right people to have coffee with you).

Your major and minor don’t matter. Most decisionmakers in industry
couldn’t tell the difference between a major in Computer Science and a
major in Mathematics if they tried. I was once reduced to tears because
a minor academic snafu threatened my ability to get a Bachelor of
Science with a major in Computer Science, which my advisor told me was
more prestigious than a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science.
Academia cares about distinctions like that. The real world does not.

Your professors might understand how the academic job market works
(short story: it is ridiculously inefficient in engineering and fubared
beyond mortal comprehension in English) but they often have quixotic
understandings of how the real world works. For example, they may push
you to get extra degrees because a) it sounds like a good idea to them
and b) they enjoy having research-producing peons who work for ramen.
Remember, market wages for people capable of producing research are
$80\~100k+++ in your field. That buys an *awful lot of ramen*.

The prof in charge of my research project offered me a spot in his lab,
a tuition waiver, and *a whole $12,000 dollars* as a stipend if I would
commit 4\~6 years to him. That’s a great deal if, and only if, you have
recently immigrated from a low-wage country and need someone to
intervene with the government to get you a visa.

If you really like the atmosphere at universities, that is cool. Put a
backpack on and you can walk into any building at any university in the
United States any time you want. Backpacks are a lot cheaper than
working in academia. You can lead the life of the mind in industry, too
— and enjoy less politics and better pay. You can even get published in
journals, if that floats your boat. (After you’ve escaped the
mind-warping miasma of academia, you might rightfully question whether
Published In A Journal is really personally or societally significant as
opposed to close approximations like Wrote A Blog Post And Showed It To
Smart People.)

**How much money do engineers make?**

Wrong question. The right question is “What kind of offers do engineers
routinely work for?”, because salary is one of many levers that people
can use to motivate you. The answer to this is, less than helpfully,
“Offers are all over the map.”

In general, big companies pay more (money, benefits, etc) than startups.
Engineers with high perceived value make more than those with low
perceived value. Senior engineers make more than junior engineers.
People working in high-cost areas make more than people in low-cost
areas. **People who are skilled in negotiation make more than those who
are not**.

We have strong cultural training to not ask about salary, ever. This is
not universal. In many cultures, professional contexts are a perfectly
appropriate time to discuss money. (If you were a middle class Japanese
man, you could reasonably be expected to reveal your exact salary to a
2nd date, anyone from your soccer club, or the guy who makes your sushi.
If you owned a company, you’d probably be cagey about your net worth but
you’d talk about employee salaries the way programmers talk about
compilers — quite frequently, without being embarrassed.) If I were a
Marxist academic or a conspiracy theorist, I might think that this bit
of middle class American culture was specifically engineered to be in
the interests of employers and against the interests of employees. Prior
to a discussion of salary at any particular target employer, you should
speak to someone who works there in a similar situation and ask about
the salary range for the position. It is <%= Date.today.year %\>; you
can find these people online. (LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, and your
(non-graph-database) social networks are all good to lean on.)

Anyhow. Engineers are routinely offered a suite of benefits. It is worth
worrying, in the United States, about health insurance (traditionally,
you get it and your employer foots most or all of the costs) and your
retirement program, which is some variant of “we will match
contributions to your 401k up to X% of salary.” The value of that is
easy to calculate: X% of salary. (It is free money, so always max out
your IRA up to the employer match. Put it in index funds and forget
about it for 40 years.)

There are other benefits like “free soda”, “catered lunches”, “free
programming books”, etc. These are social signals more than anything
else. When I say that I’m going to buy you soda, that says a specific
thing about how I run my workplace, who I expect to work for me, and how
I expect to treat them. (It says “I like to move the behavior of
unsophisticated young engineers by making this job seem fun by buying 20
cent cans of soda, saving myself tens of thousands in compensation while
simultaneously encouraging them to ruin their health.” And I like soda.)
Read social signals and react appropriately — someone who signals that,
e.g., employee education is worth paying money for might very well be a
great company to work for — but don’t give up huge amounts of
compensation in return for perks that you could trivially buy.

**How do I become better at negotiation?**This could be a post in
itself. Short version:

\a) Remember you’re selling the solution to a business need (raise
revenue or decrease costs) rather than programming skill or your
beautiful face.

\b) Negotiate aggressively with appropriate confidence, like the ethical
professional you are. It is what your counterparty is probably doing.
You’re aiming for a mutual beneficial offer, not for saying Yes every
time they say something.

\c) “What is your previous salary?” is employer-speak for “Please give
me reasons to pay you less money.” Answer appropriately.

\d) Always have a counteroffer. Be comfortable counteroffering around
axes you care about other than money. If they can’t go higher on salary
then talk about vacation instead.

\e) The only time to ever discuss salary is after you have reached
agreement in principle that they will hire you if you can strike a
mutually beneficial deal. This is late in the process after they have
invested a lot of time and money in you, specifically, *not at the
interview*. Remember that there are large costs associated with them
saying “No, we can’t make that work” and, appropriately, they will
probably not scuttle the deal over comparatively small issues which
matter quite a bit to you, like e.g. taking their offer and countering
for that plus a few thousand bucks then sticking to it.

\f) Read a book. Many have been written about negotiation. I like
Getting To Yes. It is a little disconcerting that negotiation skills are
worth thousands of dollars *per year for your entire career* but
engineers think that directed effort to study them is crazy when that
could be applied to trivialities about a technology that briefly caught
their fancy.

**How to value an equity grant**:

Roll d100. (Not the right kind of geek? Sorry. rand(100) then.)

0\~70: Your equity grant is worth nothing.

71\~94: Your equity grant is worth a lump sum of money which makes you
about as much money as you gave up working for the startup, instead of
working for a megacorp at a higher salary with better benefits.

95\~99: Your equity grant is a lifechanging amount of money. You won’t
feel rich — you’re not the richest person you know, because many of the
people you spent the last several years with are now richer than you by
definition — but your family will never again give you grief for not
having gone into $FAVORED\_FIELD like a proper $YOUR\_INGROUP.

100: You worked at the next Google, and are rich beyond the dreams of
avarice. Congratulations.

Perceptive readers will note that 100 does not actually show up on a
d100 or rand(100).

**Why are you so negative about equity grants?**

Because you radically overestimate the likelihood that your startup will
succeed and radically overestimate the portion of the pie that will be
allocated to you if the startup succeeds. Read about dilution and
liquidation preferences on Hacker News or Venture Hacks, then remember
that there are people who know more about negotiating deals than you
know about programming and imagine what you could do to a program if
there were several hundred million on the line.

**Are startups great for your career as a fresh graduate?**

The high-percentage outcome is you work really hard for the next couple
of years, fail ingloriously, and then be jobless and looking to get into
another startup. If you really wanted to get into a startup two years
out of school, you could also just go work at a megacorp for the next
two years, earn a bit of money, then take your warchest, domain
knowledge, and contacts and found one.

Working at a startup, you tend to meet people doing startups. Most of
them will not be able to hire you in two years. Working at a large
corporation, you tend to meet other people in large corporations in your
area. Many of them either will be able to hire you or will have the ear
of someone able to hire you in two years.

**So would you recommend working at a startup?**Working in a startup is
a career path but, more than that, it is a lifestyle choice. This is
similar to working in investment banking or academia. Those are three
very different lifestyles. Many people will attempt to sell you those
lifestyles as being in your interests, for their own reasons. If you
genuinely would enjoy that lifestyle, go nuts. If you only enjoy certain
bits of it, remember that many things are available a la carte if you
really want them. For example, if you want to work on cutting-edge
technology but also want to see your kids at 5:30 PM, you can work on
cutting-edge technology at many, many, many megacorps.

(Yeah, really. If it creates value for them, heck yes, they’ll invest in
it. They’ll also invest in a lot of CRUD apps, but then again, so do
startups — they just market making CRUD apps better than most megacorps
do. The first hour of the Social Network is about making a CRUD app seem
like sexy, the second is a Lifetime drama about a divorce improbably
involving two heterosexual men.)

**Your most important professional skill is communication**: Remember
engineers are not hired to create programs and how they are hired to
create business value? The dominant quality which gets you jobs is the
ability to *give people the perception that you will create value*. This
is not necessarily coextensive with ability to create value.

Some of the best programmers I know are pathologically incapable of
carrying on a conversation. People disproportionately a) wouldn’t want
to work with them or b) will underestimate their value-creation ability
because they gain insight into that ability through conversation and the
person just doesn’t implement that protocol. Conversely, people
routinely assume that I am among the best programmers they know entirely
because a) there exists observable evidence that I can program and b) I
write and speak really, really well.

(Once upon a time I would have described myself as “Slightly below
average” in programming skill. I have since learned that I had a
radically skewed impression of the skill distribution, that programming
skill is not what people actually optimize for, and that modesty is
against my interests. These days if you ask me how good of a programmer
I am I will start telling you stories about how I have programmed
systems which helped millions of kids learn to read or which provably
made companies millions. The question of where I am on the bell curve
matters to no one, so why bother worrying about it?)

Communication is a skill. Practice it: you will get better. One key
sub-skill is being able to quickly, concisely, and confidently explain
how you create value to someone who is not an expert in your field and
who does not have a priori reasons to love you. If when you attempt to
do this technical buzzwords keep coming up (“Reduced 99th percentile
query times by 200 ms by optimizing indexes on…”), take them out and try
again. You should be able to explain what you do to a bright 8 year old,
the CFO of your company, or a programmer in a different specialty, at
whatever the appropriate level of abstraction is.

**You will often be called to do Enterprise Sales and other stuff you
got into engineering to avoid**: Enterprise Sales is going into a
corporation and trying to convince them to spend six or seven figures on
buying a system which will either improve their revenue or reduce costs.
Every job interview you will ever have is Enterprise Sales. Politics,
relationships, and communication skills matter a heck of a lot,
technical reality not quite so much.

When you have meetings with coworkers and are attempting to convince
them to implement your suggestions, you will also be doing Enterprise
Sales. If getting stuff done is your job description, then convincing
people to get stuff done is a core job skill for you. Spend appropriate
effort on getting good at it. This means being able to communicate
effectively in memos, emails, conversations, meetings, and PowerPoint
(when appropriate). It means understanding how to make a business case
for a technological initiative. It means knowing that sometimes you will
make technological sacrifices in pursuit of business objectives and that
this is the right call.

**Modesty is not a career-enhancing character trait**: Many engineers
have self-confidence issues (hello, self). Many also come from
upbringings where modesty with regards to one’s accomplishments is
culturally celebrated. American businesses largely do not value modesty
about one’s accomplishments. The right tone to aim for in interviews,
interactions with other people, and life is closer to “restrained,
confident professionalism.”

If you are part of a team effort and the team effort succeeds, the right
note to hit is not “I owe it all to my team” unless your position is
such that everyone will understand you are lying to be modest. Try for
“It was a privilege to assist my team by leading their efforts with
regards to $YOUR\_SPECIALTY.” Say it in a mirror a thousand times until
you can say it with a straight face. You might feel like you’re
overstating your accomplishments. Screw that. Someone who claims to Lead
Efforts To Optimize Production while having the title Sandwich Artist is
overstating their accomplishments. You are an engineer. You work magic
which makes people’s lives better. If you were in charge of the database
specifically on an important project involving people then *heck yes*
you lead the database effort which was crucial for the success of the
project. This is how the game is played. If you feel poorly about it,
you’re like a batter who feels poorly about stealing bases in baseball:
you’re not morally superior, you’re just playing poorly

**All business decisions are ultimately made by one or a handful of
multi-cellular organisms closely related to chimpanzees, not by rules or
by algorithms**: People are people. Social grooming is a really
important skill. People will often back suggestions by friends because
they are friends, even when other suggestions might actually be better.
People will often be favoritably disposed to people they have broken
bread with. (There is a business book called Never Eat Alone. It might
be worth reading, but that title is whatever the antonym of deceptive
advertising is.) People routinely favor people who they think are like
them over people they think are not like them. (This can be good,
neutral, or invidious. Accepting that it happens is the first step to
profitably exploiting it.)

Actual grooming is at least moderately important, too, because people
are *hilariously* easy to hack by expedients such as dressing
appropriately for the situation, maintaining a professional appearance,
speaking in a confident tone of voice, etc. Your business suit will
probably cost about as much as a computer monitor. You only need it once
in a blue moon, but when you need it you’ll be really, really, really
glad that you have it. Take my word for it, if I wear everyday casual
when I visit e.g. City Hall I get treated like a hapless awkward
twenty-something, if I wear the suit I get treated like the CEO of a
multinational company. I’m actually the awkward twenty-something CEO of
a multinational company, but I get to pick which side to emphasize when
I want favorable treatment from a bureaucrat.

(People familiar with my business might object to me describing it as a
multinational company because it is not what most people think of when
“multinational company” gets used in conversation. Sorry — it is a
simple conversational hack. If you think people are pissed off at being
manipulated when they find that out, well, some people passionately hate
business suits, too. That doesn’t mean business suits are valueless. Be
appropriate to the circumstances. Technically true answers are the best
kind of answers when the alternative is Immigration deporting you, by
the way.)

**At the end of the day, your life happiness will not be dominated by
your career.** Either talk to older people or trust the social
scientists who have: family, faith, hobbies, etc etc generally swamp
career achievements and money in terms of things which actually produce
happiness. Optimize appropriately. Your career is important, and right
now it might seem like the most important thing in your life, but odds
are that is not what you’ll believe forever. Work to live, don’t live to
work.

Howdy! I write this blog to share what I've learned in running a small
software company. Want more great articles? I keep a list of [my best
work](http://www.kalzumeus.com/greatest-hits/) curated. A brief summary
of the last few years is available
[here](http://www.kalzumeus.com/start-here-if-youre-new/). If you like
what you see, I encourage you to sign up for the [RSS
feed](http://www.kalzumeus.com/feed/). If you'd like an email every two
weeks or so with advice for software businesses, [see
here.](https://training.kalzumeus.com/) Thanks for visiting!

![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3bdfbd483b7e6666886b57c8aa0dac12?s=70&d=wavatar&r=G)

#### About Patrick

Patrick is the founder of Kalzumeus Software. Want to read more stuff by
him? You should probably try this blog's [Greatest
Hits](/greatest-hits), which has a few dozen of his best articles
categorized and ready to read. Or you could mosey on over to Hacker News
and look for patio11 -- he spends an unhealthy amount of time there.

[View all posts by Patrick
→](http://www.kalzumeus.com/author/kalzumeus/)

[← How Running A Business Changes The Way You
Think](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/07/08/business-psychology/)

[I Saw An Extremely Subtle Bug Today And I Just Have To Tell Someone
→](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/11/17/i-saw-an-extremely-subtle-bug-today-and-i-just-have-to-tell-someone/)

### 281 Responses to “Don't Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice”

1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/08f13918a3d83df1b4327dc1fea587eb?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Peter October 28, 2011 at 6:03 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3992 "Direct link to this comment")

    Dont call yourself teamcoach.. then we know, you keep others from
    their work.

    And dont call yourself consultant or architect; then we know for
    sure you have no technical background; your good in talking or
    drawing but miss reality perspective.

    Worst of all call yourself manager, then you admit your not a
    technical person your only good in talking (at least you think so)
    other people think your even talking nonsense; but feel glad they
    dont see you.

    Call yourself a handy engineer not afraid to program; in fact you
    like it.

2.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5b40a72675efd66754d4334268989b8c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [NoName](http://yousmugmotherfucker.com) October 28, 2011 at 6:28 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3993 "Direct link to this comment")

    tl,dr but seriously, this stood out:

    “Their motto and sales point is “No Software”, which conveys to
    their actual customers “You know those programmers you have working
    on your internal systems? If you used Salesforce, you could fire
    half of them and pocket part of the difference in your bonus.”
    (There’s nothing wrong with this, by the way. You’re in the business
    of unemploying people. If you think that is unfair, go back to
    school and study something that doesn’t matter.”

    Go die in a fire.

3.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f777974f516d310ba223829dba857f8c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Chris Anderson](http://jchrisa.net) October 28, 2011 at 6:42 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3994 "Direct link to this comment")

    First of all thanks for the post, it was entertaining and also a
    good perspective.

    I couldn’t help thinking I’d like to see something with this tone of
    voice directed at the \#occupy movement.

4.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f07975db2bf222a79444adb325e3d7d0?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Ben Winston](http://bathouselabs.com) October 28, 2011 at 6:49 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3995 "Direct link to this comment")

    thanks for the great read! i am currently a developer (not
    programmer) at one of those mega-corps doing Big Freaking Java Web
    Application development, among other things. although you do make
    some points that seem very harsh (see above commenter for a sample
    reaction), i really appreciated this look into what businesses think
    about software. i’ve felt pretty jaded because i’m not doing “cool”
    things at work, like they do at Google or Facebook or any of the
    startups i read about on HN. but this makes me look at what i was
    missing: developing software isn’t about programming, it’s about
    improving a business. and when i look at it that way, i’ve already
    helped my business impress clients that bring in millions a year.
    and i’m only six months out of college!

    so, yeah, thanks for the insight. i’m gonna keep this in the
    favorites bar for the next time i feel like my job is meaningless :)

5.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/72afc77913578c3c80e8a28396b9e5e6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [John Pencola](http://blog.johnpencola.com/) October 28, 2011 at
    6:53 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3996 "Direct link to this comment")

    Wow. What a refreshing, no bullshit, reality check this will become
    to a lot of folks. Hopefully taken to heart. Thanks for putting this
    out there and keep up the good work!

6.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/13e33f6add8d2643e9efd5d4bcc6b6d1?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    kasey\_junk October 28, 2011 at 6:56 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3997 "Direct link to this comment")

    Amen. That is all.

7.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3fa4d7bc17023e5bfc59314c8e0a2f1f?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Henrique October 28, 2011 at 7:02 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3998 "Direct link to this comment")

    Boring read, and demotivating. I don’t think there’s something to
    learn here, except that we should be glad that there are too many
    people out there thinking the opposite.

8.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/00d1c2c85d66f9a50744e7e7c8c35ce2?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    chx October 28, 2011 at 7:22 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-3999 "Direct link to this comment")

    So then what aspiring young software developers actually put on
    their resume if not “programmer”? I think I missed that one.

9.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6695f249160eba47fed3e5fcefd2c942?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Deconstructized](http://mvanveen.net) October 28, 2011 at 7:31 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4000 "Direct link to this comment")

    Wisdom.

10. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e5d333bd73746afe1410b39555a3e4f5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    FeepingCreature October 28, 2011 at 8:11 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4002 "Direct link to this comment")

    100 does show up on a d100. Dice are 1-offset.

11. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b381e69a1fe66fa381634b4c3697440c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Doug October 28, 2011 at 8:18 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4004 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thanks for the Career Advice, from a… 30 year old? Who made a bingo
    card site???

    Sorry to sound REALLY harsh, but Patrick, pretty sure you’ll look
    back in 5 years and wonder how you could be so arrogant to think you
    could proffer so much broad advice with so little experience. Sorry,
    I actually do admire you, read most of your posts, but do yourself a
    favor and get real. This could all be summed up with, have some
    common sense, get to know yourself and human motivation, and don’t
    follow trends.

    Bring it on….

12. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f7460fac1336c305cc89916c53a3438b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    jonny October 28, 2011 at 8:41 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4005 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great work, man. It’s cool to have a look into the heart of
    things–as hard as it is for people to look at that difficult heart
    (as some commenters have shown).

    Cheers, and I’d like to hear more in this vein on HN.

13. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/362640695ed8e256d4b45d2a40519326?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Patrick October 28, 2011 at 8:42 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4006 "Direct link to this comment")

    Bug: “When you have a couple of billion lying around )”

14. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/362640695ed8e256d4b45d2a40519326?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Patrick October 28, 2011 at 8:46 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4007 "Direct link to this comment")

    Bug: “It is the right people to do,”

15. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d4a0a697c0d8a85adbe804ef3024e054?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Cidney](http://www.tulsabytes.com) October 28, 2011 at 8:46 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4008 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thank you for a great read and great advice. It really gave me some
    perspective on what to expect after college and some clue as to what
    I should focus on improving; interpersonal skills, public speaking
    and able to pass the fizzbuzz test of course.

16. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0f8afbd0e37518b6c741fe60b8105ab4?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Alistair October 28, 2011 at 8:47 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4009 "Direct link to this comment")

    This was interesting and I largely agree.

    Some thoughts:

    - Your focus seems to be on maximizing salary, ahead of all else and
    this is not a logical goal of all personality types. For example, I
    could network more with the bosses at my work and this would likely
    increase my perceived value and thus salary, however I dont
    particularly like them so I choose less salary over pretending to
    like people that I don’t like.

    - It is important to always be mindful of the experience you are
    getting. Even if your salary is low, if you are rewriting Google’s
    search algorithm from scratch you can be pretty much guaranteed\
     either a large pay rise in the future or your next job will have an
    amazing salary.

    - I would say in most cases the person who will decide is in a dev
    team lead type role. They are not interested in how you increased
    revenue or decreased costs in previous roles. They are interested in
    how you used technology X and design pattern Y so you will be able
    to hit the ground running in their team (ok and increase revenue or
    decrease costs). So for business people sure focus on this, but
    technical people aren’t business people.

    Anyway, awesome post.

17. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a2889d30669279ccdbc8a971544a9267?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Josh October 28, 2011 at 8:50 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4010 "Direct link to this comment")

    As a 36 year old programmer who has makes over $1 million per year…
    this is spot on!

    Fantastic post. I found my way eventually, but I wish I had read
    this when I was in college :)

18. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/362640695ed8e256d4b45d2a40519326?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Patrick October 28, 2011 at 8:51 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4011 "Direct link to this comment")

    Bug: “saying Yes every time”

19. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/362640695ed8e256d4b45d2a40519326?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Patrick October 28, 2011 at 8:57 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4012 "Direct link to this comment")

    Bug: “you’re just playing poorly” (no period)

20. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0c1520038e7f70997042b0c9e721df76?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [James](http://neurogami.com) October 28, 2011 at 9:04 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4013 "Direct link to this comment")

    ‘So then what aspiring young software developers actually put on
    their resume if not “programmer”? I think I missed that one.’

    Whatever conveys the value you will bring. Ideally something that
    shows that you a) created more value than you cost, or b) saved more
    value than you cost.

    I used to craft my resume to play up my skills and knowledge, but
    saying I had five years of Java or a CompSci B.S. meant whomever was
    judging me would have to do assorted estimates and guesses to
    determine if I was going to, ultimately, make money for them.

    OTOH, if I said I reduced the cost of running a service center
    because I wrote code that processed more transactions in less time,
    upping profits, or helped created a Web site that earned X dollars
    per year, the math becomes much easier.

    The problem for many people is either lack of such experience or
    lack of knowledge about what they contributed to the bottom line. I
    now encourage people to keep an updated resume that focuses on the
    bottom line, and to not wait until they are actually job hunting to
    figure out just what they’ve contributed (because by then it’s too
    late or too hard to find out).

    Whatever your experience try to out it in terms of tangible value.
    And if you don’t have hard data then make up something defensible.
    (Don’t plain lie; you want to get an interview where you can explain
    your value in factual concrete terms. If you’re guestimating, say so
    in the interview. The fact that you even think in those terms will
    be notable.)

21. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/81e649868a7d1914a3c92b2af2d50993?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    dude October 28, 2011 at 9:15 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4014 "Direct link to this comment")

    lol @ enterprise

    plenty of real ‘programmer’ jobs where we are valued, they’re just
    not at bigcorp

22. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3d2f793860bf8e45eca2c65e1fc5e910?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [PJ Brunet](http://tomakefast.com) October 28, 2011 at 9:19 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4015 "Direct link to this comment")

    It’s just marketing from my point of view. Do you drink pop or soda?
    Same difference.

    Every market is different. For example, here’s convincing evidence
    PHP “programmers” should call themselves developers –
    [http://www.google.com/insights/search/\#q=php%20developer%2Cphp%20programmer&cmpt=q](http://www.google.com/insights/search/#q=php%20developer%2Cphp%20programmer&cmpt=q)

23. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6e0018f10f6e2d156711be230568cb34?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Nathan October 28, 2011 at 9:58 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4017 "Direct link to this comment")

    Such arrogance. What you describe is a pointless existence dedicated
    to serving the prison that is your career, only to starve the
    intellect and serve the system. Indeed there are ways to live a very
    above average life (monetarily and otherwise) while not falling into
    the soul sucking pit described in this post.

24. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8a7bef787185bef39fc2486106213d0a?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Matt October 28, 2011 at 10:17 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4018 "Direct link to this comment")

    Patrick,

    I appreciate your advice. Thanks for the effort you put into your
    blog.

    I find your writing is taking more and more effort to understand,
    though. For example: “All business decisions are ultimately made by
    one or a handful of multi-cellular organisms closely related to
    chimpanzees, not by rules or by algorithms.”. How about: “Business
    decisions are made by people, not algorithms.” Easier to understand,
    and shorter. Or, “It might be worth reading, but that title is
    whatever the antonym of deceptive advertising is.” I didn’t bother
    to decipher that- I just want to get to the good stuff! I know you
    know you’re writing to nerds, but that doesn’t mean we’re different
    than everyone else and can understand this kind of writing without
    effort.

    Anyway, I’ll still keep reading your posts, even if you ignore this
    Random Guy On The Internet.

25. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d5e52a3285b0da31e3bf3507e13ace07?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    mmmpork October 28, 2011 at 10:40 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4019 "Direct link to this comment")

    Awesome post and full of truth. There are some commenters who seem
    really shocked and offended by what you are saying and actually
    calling you arrogant!! That just makes me laugh. A lot of developers
    I work with live very sheltered lives and have enough basic skill
    and overconfidence that they can keep their head in the sand and
    plug along from programmer gig to programmer gig. Some of them
    really think they shit gold bricks but they can’t speak to the real
    value of any of the work they do. As a woman engineer, we face a lot
    of extra challenges, largely social. Women are generally socially
    conditioned towards modesty, even in very simple language like
    prefacing things we say with “I think” or “I feel”. I’ve had to
    learn to speak about myself in the terms you’ve described and
    express expertise and overconfidence when I don’t really feel that
    way about myself just to be taken seriously by my various managers.
    There’s a great book I read called Corporate Confidential that was
    written by a former VP of HR from a financial institution.
    Everything you say is spot on with her advice. Thanks for the great
    post.

26. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/20cf171ccca58a68d388ae0dd9e74625?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Steve Phillips](http://sbhackerspace.com) October 28, 2011 at 10:46
    pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4020 "Direct link to this comment")

    ‘…If you used Salesforce, you could fire half of them and pocket
    part of the difference in your bonus.” (There’s nothing wrong with
    this, by the way. You’re in the business of unemploying people. If
    you think that is unfair, go back to school and study something that
    doesn’t matter.)’

    You, sir, are an asshole.

    Most meaningful study has nothing to do with destroying jobs, and
    you know it.

27. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/11ea972c899baccb9c535fbae8add498?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Clark October 28, 2011 at 10:53 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4021 "Direct link to this comment")

    Career advise nicely explained for developers… I wish I read this
    when I graduated from college. Took me a few years of stumbling to
    realize the business side of an engineering career.

28. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fb46d1d0c40a3d2e4495ce2a6354dcb1?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    George October 28, 2011 at 11:03 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4022 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is so true. Exactly what I’ve experienced.

    I’ve seen so many of my fellow CS students focus on such unimportant
    things like the depth of some Framework/API just to end up highly
    qualified in a underpaid job and exploited. And then others, that
    couldn’t even spell programming got hired for high status jobs
    simply based on their communication skills.

29. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/362c50277afd8b25b38010535b1c7cc5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    bubba October 28, 2011 at 11:05 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4023 "Direct link to this comment")

    My main rule of thumb is: just find a job free of psychopaths and
    you’ll be happy. I worked at one place where the Senior System
    Administrator kept demanding to know why an error was made in our
    department by my co-worker. He wanted a rational reason for
    irrational behaviour. He would complain often over several years
    that he was never given a “reason”. Another place, this programmer
    would always say “Am I right?” every 2 minutes while in
    conversation, willing to argue for long periods of time and causing
    much distress until people said he was right. Such people will drive
    you slowly insane. I finally stopped caring about the type of place
    I worked and was happy to finally find a place free of psychopaths.

30. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/362c50277afd8b25b38010535b1c7cc5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    bubba October 28, 2011 at 11:09 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4024 "Direct link to this comment")

    And another thing … why do hiring people care if I know XP, Agile,
    Scrum, etc. These strategies will be quickly picked up in the
    working environment through experience. The one implemented are
    determined already by lead programmers or other leaders, and I have
    little say in the near future how they are done.

31. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/933285225d6a05a99fe35d72b38ff17e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Anonymous Coward October 28, 2011 at 11:09 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4025 "Direct link to this comment")

    I pity you, as well as all those who have had to suffer through your
    misanthropic perspectives while working alongside you.

    Many coding jobs are as you describe, and in fact, if you’re
    talented and have some degree of drive, you can most certainly find
    a job working for a company at which you will create user-facing,
    business critical software that is a pleasure to build.

    Drop the notion that working at some large corporation is in any way
    good for your career trajectory (or development of complementary
    skills), and find a startup in your community that needs someone who
    can code (not that hard to find).

    Don’t listen to this crap. If you’re great, there are great
    opportunities. For all the rest, maybe this crap applies.

32. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/18c9ed6423e1476ec637a5a542181691?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    rxp October 28, 2011 at 11:59 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4027 "Direct link to this comment")

    I’ve been working in industry for just over a year now, and man, I
    wish I’d read this a year ago! Lots of good stuff in here for people
    just starting out their careers.

33. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e265d27c98373416cc77af4f465b2688?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Tony Mechelynck](http://users.skynet.be/antoine.mechelynck/)
    October 29, 2011 at 12:16 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4028 "Direct link to this comment")

    *90% of programming jobs are in creating Line of Business software.*

    How very true. And even if you get hired by a “software company”,
    the chances are that your “customer-facing” programs will still be
    payroll, accounting, or project management — the constant changes in
    legislation (for the former two) or the constant bugs and snags (for
    the latter) make sure that there will always be small and tedious
    adjustments. Sounds familiar? You bet. Been there done that, in the
    early seventies — and got bored, so I “made it happen”: studied the
    mainframe’s system software (which was fully documented, in those
    times) and became “the” onsite software troubleshooter. Much more
    fun for a few years, with crash trips on weekends from Brussels to
    Paris or Manchester when there was a severe hardware breakdown.
    Until my direct boss said I couldn’t “give” a (very small but
    tricky, and with nice output) software utility to the hardware
    makers, it had to be “sold” (and of course they wouldn’t buy it). So
    I quit. My take on the matter is: if it ain’t fun, it ain’t for me,
    because if then I take it, I’ll botch it, and I don’t like that.

34. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/45a0c19f3084d130b5383c2c907fec70?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Peter Ashford October 29, 2011 at 12:19 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4029 "Direct link to this comment")

    Your advice makes sense if optimising your remuneration is your only
    goal. Geeks, like most people, have a range of motivations.
    Businesses, like people, are run by people who value a range of
    different things. The last person I hired, I hired because he had a
    passion for technology. And I didn’t try to talk down his wages.

    Not everyone is an asshole who wants to screw their workmates over.

    I’m glad that I don’t work in your world, or with you.

35. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7fbf46d97324d6a5649d1ff2e3f6663d?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Rudd-O October 29, 2011 at 12:20 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4030 "Direct link to this comment")

    Lovin’ the haters in the comments. Such incidence of haters is
    usually a sign that your article is spot-on, and you struck a chord
    that really BUGGED people who are MISERABLE in their lives (which
    made them react negatively to your wisdom). Congrats on the post.

36. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4216a44c8ac61b11294fea639585202c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Hollywood Extra October 29, 2011 at 12:20 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4031 "Direct link to this comment")

    Anyone who refers to themselves as an “Anonymous Coward” should
    never start a comment with “I pity you.” Your pity is grossly
    misdirected.

37. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cfe5a62cc8a75bf727245d749f534a41?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Chance October 29, 2011 at 12:26 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4032 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great post! After 10 years at the worlds largest software company I
    can tell you every bit of this is true.

38. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4c55957fd25a0614c7e9cd273c567e73?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Stefan Mensink](http://www.mensink.nl/) October 29, 2011 at 12:46
    am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4034 "Direct link to this comment")

    Overall a good post, but…

    - Startups. The thing about them (or small/growing companies in
    general) is, I really think it can be good for young people to work
    at one for a while. They generally provide you with more insight
    into the way businesses work than any big company ever could. If you
    decide to spend a while with a startup, spend time in getting to
    know how the company works, how the workflow works, how decisions
    and connections are made, etc. I’ve worked at a startup and learned
    a lot, and had a lot of fun too.\
     - Your blog is mainly about money, which I have no problems with. I
    mean the reason people work is for money, isn’t it? My advice,
    however, would be to focus on fun too. Anyone can work that job
    where you’d build CRUD app after CRUD app every day. Find something
    inspiring, and be inspired. Also, try to inspire others. Giving
    yourself the chance to tackle interesting problems with beautiful
    solutions can make the difference between an OK job and the joy of
    getting to work to create something awesome.

    The statement about reducing cost/improving profit however is spot
    on! Developers should pay attention to the companies they work in,
    and possibly even make suggestions that could accomplish one of
    these goals. Don’t just focus on getting your app done or adding as
    many features as you can, focus on how it wil work best for the
    people that are going to use it!

39. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a1a853094a29f01f7dcf078d361a5bae?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Rafael October 29, 2011 at 1:43 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4035 "Direct link to this comment")

    Sorry but you will be de damn rich and damn miserable. I see even a
    divorce in the horizon. You focus on getting rich instead of being
    happy. Bad focus.

    I feel very happy being a programmer and feel very sorry for people
    that feel miserable just because the run into “the upper positions”
    because they wanted the money. ;)

    Good luck anyway ;)

40. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0cb8f7ad73c88907cd5ec416588a314c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Scott Brickey](http://blog.sbrickey.net) October 29, 2011 at 2:07
    am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4036 "Direct link to this comment")

    Almost died laughing at “Someone who claims to Lead Efforts To
    Optimize Production while having the title Sandwich Artist is
    overstating their accomplishments” :)

    Well written, and VERY accurate.

41. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5847aaf4e9d242540c8eaf22e74db205?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jhon October 29, 2011 at 2:36 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4037 "Direct link to this comment")

    Interesting to read. Not everything applies to everyone, as the
    comments shows, but it’s nice to have a “marketing” point of view of
    the job.

42. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3aaa50fe0c1d4d35431cd7968f7e77b8?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jose October 29, 2011 at 2:37 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4038 "Direct link to this comment")

    I agree, people that develops software(or any other specialist)
    could ignore bast areas of knowledge, from economics to marketing
    and others thing. They are smart and they should not have problems
    acquiring this knowledge if they want but they have because they
    ignore what they don’t know.

    The fact that some of them hate this article so much is a proof of
    the typical “Denial”, when we don’t want to acknowledge reality.

    “It might be worth reading, but that title is whatever the antonym
    of deceptive advertising is.”

    @Matt: I don’t understand the above statement either.

    Disclaimer: I’m developer myself.

43. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f030d5621a0149d85ba734e6fd73e360?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Sandra October 29, 2011 at 2:46 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4039 "Direct link to this comment")

    You forget it takes a specific breed of people to follow the advice
    you attempt to share in this article. I think you could have
    summarized it all by saying: go to school for engineering, then go
    to school for business and you’ll get where business majors get to
    in a software company.

44. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c80801d7f9dc54bce3f00b7d995227dc?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    schiptsov October 29, 2011 at 3:55 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4040 "Direct link to this comment")

    Nice style, which looks like copied, along with some sentences, from
    Spolsky.

    Good imitation is much more difficult to do that just copy-paste.

    Congratulations.

45. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c784a4f7bd9d81de0cc2a03da515e27d?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Michael October 29, 2011 at 4:06 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4041 "Direct link to this comment")

    I have to laugh about the asshole comments here. Your posting
    applies for Germany too and I have made some of those experiences
    too but I’m currently shifting my profession from mechanics
    engineering to computer engineering and I’m wondering what will
    await me after college. Apparentely the same :-D

46. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/23848bbf7923f00278406f2e2d965236?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    nyctech October 29, 2011 at 4:16 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4042 "Direct link to this comment")

    I have never read a log post quite like this. You did a fantastic
    job of weaving great advice in with what seems to be a soured
    retrospective on career choices. As a former software architect
    building crappy back office software who is now a tech recruiter I
    think this is a great read for fresh grads. It can also serve as a
    compassionate companion read for those toiling away in a cubicle
    farm building expense tracking applications for corporate entities.
    Outside of that it was an empathy evoking read that frustrated me
    because your narrow view adds a bitter tone to the entire blog
    entry.

47. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/87ddc2ca94df79b10dad596da2a42217?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Rob October 29, 2011 at 4:17 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4043 "Direct link to this comment")

    Interesting read. Most of it is true, and that’s really sad.

    But why not try to change this, rather than giving advise on how to
    fit in to this model of bullshit? I grew up in Europe and live in
    Canada now. I could not believe the crap that was dished out during
    interviews here (I was the person interviewing). It seemed that
    every candidate was the best thing since sliced bread. (Note: they
    were not).

    Personally I prefer an honest representation of your skills and
    experience. That’s also why I do not like sales :)

    Money is important, but it’s more important to like your job.

48. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a9bda8900391208ef4ea86c72a0e93af?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Lincoln October 29, 2011 at 4:18 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4044 "Direct link to this comment")

    Amazing insight. While I’m not too concerned about what benefits I
    get, the programming and negotiation sections were illuminating.

49. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c6a3e67bff73d2a8807174c53cd5d0a8?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Mike October 29, 2011 at 4:58 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4045 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is, no joke, one of the best blog posts I’ve ever read by
    anybody, anywhere. Keep up the fantastic writing, this is exactly
    the kind of stuff I wish I had known when I graduated from college
    15 years ago, and it is spot on.

50. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2ff62ce4120fba75903decc672dcd88b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Nitish October 29, 2011 at 5:16 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4046 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thanks for the post! I am a final year Computer Science Engineering
    Student and the post seemed “Enlightening” :)

51. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5583010c58623c1540cd1ed5db931e5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [xivSolutions](http://typecastexception.com) October 29, 2011 at
    5:24 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4047 "Direct link to this comment")

    Interesting to see who chooses to post their comments anonymously,
    and who puts some form of user name ( or even link to themselves).
    Of particular interest are those who flame the “you are in the
    business of unemploying people” statement.

    In most cases, the purpose for developing software, and the software
    most valued by most companies, is ALL about automating some task.
    Automation USUALLY means eliminating 1-to-many human worker
    positions and letting the computer do it. There are exceptions, but
    as a rule, I gaurantee you this is true for most of the industry.

    To those who post anonymously “Anonymous” and “Anonymous Coward”:
    grow a pair. Really? If you valued your opinion as much as you seem
    to think the rest of the world should, you wouldn’t hide. I suppose
    at least “Anonymous Coward” chose to hide behind an appropriate
    handle. I respect Steve Phillips’ comment, because he had the
    confidence in his opinion to identify himself in his post, with a
    link. I disagree with him, and find his comment a bit harsh, but I
    am going to go from here to his page and find out more about him. I
    just might get additional perspective.

    I found this article to be quite informative, well-written advice on
    CAREER DEVELOPMENT. Hence, the focus on . . . career development.
    Items such as salary, benefits, etc. ARE important. I agree with the
    opinion of others (who seem confident enough in their opinions to
    identify themselves, with links, even!) that for many, happiness
    with the work can and should be a key factor. How the individual
    ranks this in comparison to salary/benefits depends on life
    situation and goals.

    Thanks Patrick for the great read, and for sharing your experiences.

52. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/998f47135d2300e236d640f6e6026ba6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Buzz Hornsby October 29, 2011 at 5:35 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4048 "Direct link to this comment")

    Some of this is accurate, but much of it is the jaundiced view of a
    young programmer who’s not happy about his career path so far. The
    bombast and over-generalization undercut your overall point.

    Some of us have absolutely no stomach for the “sales engineer” idea.
    Some of us are not interested in IT World and the larger
    machinations of industry titans. Some of us are perfectly happy to
    let the marketroids, money guys, and player-wannabees inhabit that
    world of gossip and fashion. Some of us just like code, tools,
    languages, making things work, breaking them, and making them work
    again.

    And some of us have had fantastically successful careers. It still
    says “programmer” on my resume, despite the specific titles I’ve
    been given. Works for me.

53. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/40413e69228725949d21d2a432ebba1d?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Sam October 29, 2011 at 5:38 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4049 "Direct link to this comment")

    I read a study recently the detailed the level of
    compartmentalisation in highly-successful people was so total and
    complete that they had passed far beyond the clinical definition of
    sociopath and many of them sat squarely in the “psychopath”
    branding. Pretty chilling stuff. In order to become successful you
    must forget who you are and where you come from and ramifications
    your actions has on other entities.

    This whole article is dripping with psychopathic telltales.

    And it depresses the hell out of me to know that you’re right on
    nearly every point.

54. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/165ac66fd9d3b9fea81be3540e7fdbe8?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Mike Finney](http://www.SmilingSoftwareSolutions) October 29, 2011
    at 5:42 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4050 "Direct link to this comment")

    Nice blog! One thing that I want to understand better is how to
    connect the money outcome to the Software Development that I was a
    key part of.

55. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/989fbf54d619a3fce51c6549b6850519?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Pedro Azevedo October 29, 2011 at 6:31 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4053 "Direct link to this comment")

    ‘Perceptive readers will note that 100 does not actually show up on
    a d100 or rand(100).’

    Perceptive readers might also note DX includes X, and rand(X) starts
    with 0.

    Stopped reading.

    Makes some good points, but ruined by excessive cynicism.

56. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/653ff1fc9dfbe3f0e8079bdb71605f8a?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    easatbank October 29, 2011 at 6:59 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4054 "Direct link to this comment")

    Bravo, Patrick.

    I’ve been a “software developer” for 25 years, contracting in more
    than 10 different industries, dozens of combinations of languages,
    stacks and platforms. You demonstrate wisdom well beyond your years.

    I’m very dissappointed with the number of readers who have missed
    your message, focussing on phrases and other minutae and imagining
    that they understand your article.

    The debate your article has created is inspiring and will help it
    live on to ripe old age.

57. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e7be134a6de3d308adf765be1004c450?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Peter October 29, 2011 at 7:00 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4055 "Direct link to this comment")

    Patrick, what is the purpose of the commenting feature on this site?
    I’ve read the entire page and I’m wondering what benefit you see.

58. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9c4cb2a216a517ad43d422c237954aa2?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Marcel October 29, 2011 at 7:12 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4056 "Direct link to this comment")

    Peter Drucker originally coined the term profit center around 1945.
    He later recanted, calling it “One of the biggest mistakes I have
    made.” He later asserted that there are only cost centers within a
    business, and “The only profit center is a customer whose cheque
    hasn’t bounced.”

    Source:
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profit\_center](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profit_center)

59. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fd7ef5a35deefa2b5ab76b8f5bb4e327?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Rikard Ottosson October 29, 2011 at 7:56 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4057 "Direct link to this comment")

    Of course our business is about eliminating staff. Who is dumb
    enough to create a LOB system that requires as much manual
    administration or more than the preceding system or manual process?
    I think this was a great, positive blog entry that warns that if you
    strive to look at the big picture and stay concious of your goals
    you can find a good place where you’ll thrive, whether it is as
    alpha-geek in a small outfit or a salesy senior dev tech. I have to
    agree on startups, when you need to see ur kids it doesn’t seem cool
    with the long hours anymore, just juvenile. Also, re the comments
    about techy people focusing on tech and not sales, I have to say I
    haven’t come across a single instance when getting the picture
    hasn’t been useful. Many deva better versed than me in using the
    coolest IDE boosters, the awesomest OSS frameworks etc, still took
    longer to implement features because they could not understand the
    client’s requirements as they did not care about the big picture.

60. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ccddf43f6a7a99378f32a0c39c3f8733?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [JohnFx](http:/improvingsoftware.com) October 29, 2011 at 8:15 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4058 "Direct link to this comment")

    I think this may be the perfect article on the career of a
    programmer. I wish I had written it first.

    Awesome stuff!

61. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/39026ceaceeb3cf1ffd00e943ae666a6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    I'm a programmer October 29, 2011 at 8:38 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4059 "Direct link to this comment")

    Are you really in the IT industry? With this type of arrogance, if u
    don’t belong to the IT industry, then u are too retarded to even
    comment; if you are, then u are an absolute failure.

62. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ab2120ce9b4db5b17fe560affd85a612?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    kanna October 29, 2011 at 8:47 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4060 "Direct link to this comment")

    fantastic article. reflecting the realties of the world

63. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e3b8828cf8fa6a5279d799989bbbf8dd?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Benn Linger October 29, 2011 at 9:12 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4061 "Direct link to this comment")

    Excellent read. Truly the best post of its kind I’ve read in recent
    memory.

64. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/78eda048ac4aaf3640443ef8f455e11f?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Thomas Frank](http://collegeinfogeek.com) October 29, 2011 at 10:06
    am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4062 "Direct link to this comment")

    This was an awesome read and I really want to make all my computer
    science/engineering major friends read it before they graduate.

    Also, to the above commenter: who cares how old the author is or
    what his product is? Age doesn’t matter, and just because you’re not
    impressed by his product doesn’t mean it’s not successful or that a
    lot of work hasn’t gone into it.

65. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0b19e72870d5da01076a77d2793c5de5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Programmer October 29, 2011 at 10:11 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4063 "Direct link to this comment")

    I don’t understand anyone who calls this a good or even true
    article. It’s entertaining to a degree but I can’t recognize
    anything in it.

    I \*love\* everyday I get to get up in the morning and write code.
    It’s the one thing my entire life that fills me with so much
    happiness I sometimes think I don’t deserve it. My client loves my
    work and so does the rest of the small startup I’m working for. I
    make great money and I feel useful and my work meaningful every day.

    And this like every other job in my life just fell into my lap. I
    was recommended by contacts. I’ve seriously never had a problem
    getting good jobs (my last job was programming mobile games which
    was hilarious).

    I feel like the writer gave up on life and wrote a complaining
    article instead of moving on to bigger and better. Everything single
    thing that people complain about I’ve found that it’s very possible
    to avoid it. Like “I work in a megacorp doing java and it’s
    boring!”, well keep your eyes and out when the moment is right you
    switch to a better job at a smaller company where you can be more
    important and people care.

    If you’re American: I seriously advice you to get some work
    experience in Europe where we have 5-6 weeks of vacation and good
    benefits by law. America treats it’s workers like dog food it would
    seem.

    Anyway, these kinds of articles make me annoyed because they contain
    solvable problems that are portrayed as somehow unsolvable or hard
    to solve.

    My advice is to call yourself a programmer and if someone fires you
    count your blessings you don’t have to work at a crap company like
    that.

    Cheers!

66. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/eadc0da9f707ff5a5a5195d405639f71?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Patrick](http://patrickavella.com) October 29, 2011 at 10:20 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4064 "Direct link to this comment")

    I read and agreed with a lot of this article, but I think there’s
    some really bad career advice given. “Your software stack doesn’t
    matter” is a very very bad piece of advice. The industry has
    changed, and your software stack does very much matter. Are you a
    wordpress professional with published modules? Are you deeply
    involved with working with the peoplesoft platform? How about
    someone who’s been writing oracle forms for the past five years?
    When a employer hires you, they do NOT want to train you. There’s no
    “sink or swim” in this industry, because if you’re not a pro in the
    desired software stack you’re just not going to get hired. You can
    choose to be platform agnostic to open up your job choices, but the
    pay won’t be as good, and the companies will be smaller. Competent
    companies with competent IT management know exactly what their
    software stack is and will go to great lengths to find (and even
    relocate) people who are professionals in THEIR preferred technology
    stack.

    There you have it.

67. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5e0811a1960879b61b7adf15c53c48de?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Jeremy Hutchings](http://www.jeremyhutchings.com) October 29, 2011
    at 11:01 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4065 "Direct link to this comment")

    Culturally narrow and ignores a lot of the psychology, though a good
    list of points for people to go though from their own point of view.

68. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b9762aadb738ba41d2d20a97dd78810b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Mentifex](http://www.scn.org/~mentifex/AiMind.html) October 29,
    2011 at 11:12 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4066 "Direct link to this comment")

    I am a programmer of artificial intelligence and I do not care
    whether you hire me or not, because my AI software will make you
    obsolete.

69. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/12dc941baa93ae1e0a220002c3bb46d1?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Developer Analyst October 29, 2011 at 11:38 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4067 "Direct link to this comment")

    Awesome article and bang on in terms of career advice.

    I will be recommending this article to all developers I work with.

    Thank you for putting the time and effort into writing it!

70. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f8355b348d1b46820c5d34e3290a4656?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    YetAnotherProgrammer October 29, 2011 at 11:39 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4068 "Direct link to this comment")

    Dear Patrick,

    Don’t call yourself a programmer, really, because you’re not. You’ve
    taught english and played bingo, where is the programming in that? I
    would be ashamed to call myself a programmer knowing that a person
    like you calls himself a programmer too. Programming it’s an art,
    it’s a joyful activity, you’re just to much of an ass to know that.
    If you just don’t like programming, don’t do it, it’s that simple,
    but don’t rant about something just because you’re not good at it.
    The shit you just wrote (yeah, it’s shit, anyone who believe it
    actually has some real value, besides entertainment, are in a real
    need of a reality check) reminds me of all those “alternative
    medicine” gurus: they try to sell you water telling you it will cure
    your headaches, and at the same time, rant about the uselessness of
    traditional medicine.

    In conclusion, you are \*NOT\* a programmer, you will \*NEVER\* be a
    programmer, \*STOP\* acting like you are a programmer, i call myself
    a programmer because i’m proud of it, i would call myself an asshole
    if would write rubbish like this, i would call myself a dumb-ass if
    I would thing this article has some value.

    Sincerely,\
     YetAnotherProgrammer

71. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/662dd53b43881486edbd91c2aa087093?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Gregory](http://gregory.vincic.org) October 29, 2011 at 12:15 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4069 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thank you for a nice article. You say in the beginning

    “The goal is to make you happy, by filling in the gaps in your
    education regarding how the “real world” actually works.”

    Let’s assume your description of our “real world” is correct. Does
    it make you happy knowing this “fact”? It sounds more as if you gave
    up on what really made you happy and joined the dark side instead.\
     If your goal was be to make us happy by filling this educational
    gap of ours, then you failed.\
     We should strive to change this reality and not give in to it.\
     The course I would add to every engineering education would be

    “Learn to play an instrument”

    It would sure bring me more happiness.

72. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9e38599b7ccca234f1fd436b9b7856dc?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Chuck Norris is not a programmer October 29, 2011 at 12:15 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4070 "Direct link to this comment")

    \>\> starting from “fairly bright engineer with low self-confidence
    and zero practical knowledge of business.”

    Programmers often start as kids with talent for seeing details in
    things. That’s a universal world-wide phenomenon. You can’t write
    code if you can’t tell a=b from a==b. And often that brings lack of
    talent for the big picture =\> hence zero knowledge of business.

    A good way for any programmer to boost his (but not hers)
    big-picture-skills and self-confidence is to train martial arts,
    boxing, wrestling, self-defence…. disciplines that train you to get
    the feeling for the big picture of things. In a very real-world
    stressful environment very unlike computer programming.

    People will feel self-confidence and you will get a better job. Or
    you can slam down somebody’s laptop on the meeting if you don’t
    agree with him. Or push the guy that called you ‘geek’ on your way
    to the toilet. Some knowledge of necessary force and conceal carry
    laws is also helpful so you don’t end up doing time for slicing
    throat of a sales guy who called you the “working bee”.

    The more different things you know the better you will fare.

73. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ad6e2b05f42e3755422f41de2181f9d8?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Mike G.](http://michaelguarascio.com) October 29, 2011 at 12:28 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4071 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great info on how the corporate world works, for a technical person
    with blinders on. Be careful though kids, if you start communicating
    too well people will try to make you a manager before long…

74. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4c4692c3cb510a996685f36e1c5dba80?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Ben Leslie October 29, 2011 at 12:40 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4072 "Direct link to this comment")

    If you “write and speak really, really well.”, why do you keep using
    collections of letters like “favoritably” as if they were words?

75. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e996ea4893c75ca9f5d6b6f1045b4c1b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Thibaut Colar October 29, 2011 at 12:41 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4073 "Direct link to this comment")

    So a programmer is the guy that does the “boring” work and might
    have a sense of ethics which obviously is incompatible with success
    (Not the first time I hear that stupid argument unfortunately).

    Well I rather be that, than a yuppy that thinks being successful
    mean laying off as many people as he can.

    “Line business software” … boring, yes. But there is a reason why
    there is “business” in there. Maybe if your business and it’s
    software was best of breed that would be a better way to be a
    successful and LIKED business, rather than using the cheapest thing
    you can find and the lowest number of employees possible and then
    rely on marketing, phony SEO and what not.

    What’s your credential exactly, you started what? Bingo something …
    ho yeah that must make you a guru, ninja, expert or something.

76. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8127242ebc451dd913c7d2f8c2560d4b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Joe Nelson](http://begriffsschrift.com) October 29, 2011 at 12:48
    pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4074 "Direct link to this comment")

    The article is wise to remind us that programmers are hired to solve
    business problems. A programmer looking to sell their services would
    be smart to keep those business problems in mind when talking to a
    buyer.

    However, as others have mentioned, the article is contemptuous of
    technical ability itself, and of pride in craftsmanship. This debate
    reminds me of one from 2400 years ago where a guy named Gorgias took
    Patrick McKenzie’s side.

    “Gorgias … asserts that it is an advantage of his profession that a
    man can be considered above specialists without having to learn
    anything of substance.”\

    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gorgias\_(dialogue)\#The\_debate\_about\_rhetoric](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gorgias_(dialogue)#The_debate_about_rhetoric)

77. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f620f4647fb816073c9152a284245e64?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jerry October 29, 2011 at 1:18 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4075 "Direct link to this comment")

    I will be sure to take none of your advice.

78. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/51ebd23f14582811c5c692b28dc6e2ca?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    mgb October 29, 2011 at 1:28 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4076 "Direct link to this comment")

    Clearly you’ve only ever done the roll-two-ten-siders d100 trick.
    There are (or were) a few non-offset 100 siders made. They’re not
    very fun to roll, but they do have the singular advantage of having
    a 100 on them.

79. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c2ecdef7d00f3d417a1b3f470613ece?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Peter Drinnan](http://www.pdvictor.com) October 29, 2011 at 1:56 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4079 "Direct link to this comment")

    I have been calling myself a business solution provider for years.
    Same thing as the author here in how long it took me to realize the
    word “programmer” is a no no.

    btw, I am having a hard time believing new comp sci grads can’t
    solve the FizzBuzz test. I need to put that thing to the test on
    some of my junior guys next week.

    Thanks for the great article and I also enjoyed reading a lot of the
    comments.

80. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/900d03a51c4fc966cbd56f0dca1bedf7?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    mark wusinich October 29, 2011 at 2:15 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4080 "Direct link to this comment")

    I finished reading this great article and then I was like “What’s
    this thumbnail of bingocards doing here?”. Good work. Glad to have
    finally found where you are writing now.

81. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2801f5145de98010dd72f1ac6d92938f?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [John (TentBlogger)](http://tentblogger.com) October 29, 2011 at
    2:39 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4081 "Direct link to this comment")

    this was epic. what a read. great stuff. it was shared with my
    startup team and we all had a great laugh.

    :)

82. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1d5169dc97fb5f852d9da05d9be3c3d9?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jack S October 29, 2011 at 3:06 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4082 "Direct link to this comment")

    That is a very long rant, a few gems in there… keep it up!

83. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f49dd71173d573837e29a8e09780f17a?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Someone October 29, 2011 at 3:28 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4083 "Direct link to this comment")

    Remember that it may be illegal to call yourself an engineer if you
    don’t have an accredited degree in engineering, in certain countries
    (eg some commonwealth countries)

84. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fdc9859e043277b51de47a6ea16ac13c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Smart Company Software](http://www.smartcompanysoftware.com)
    October 29, 2011 at 3:43 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4084 "Direct link to this comment")

    Wow, I think I’m going to have to read this again! \*scrolls to the
    top of th page\*

85. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3b1bb8e1dcb33082842f3502df34c7a2?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    jw October 29, 2011 at 3:50 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4085 "Direct link to this comment")

    Focusing your career on value creation (be the person who creates
    the thing that people buy) can lead to ownership of the values
    creation if you’re smart. Just be sure you understand what
    “ownership” means, and you won’t end up working for an absentee
    landlord (AKA a VC). It’s the theme of mISV if you’re paying
    attention.

86. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2d0142f08cbe359576a2aaa296dfc273?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Clinton Gallagher](http://clintongallagher.metromilwaukee.com)
    October 29, 2011 at 4:53 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4086 "Direct link to this comment")

    Honestly, the first word that comes to mind every time I read:

    \c) ”What is your previous salary?” is employer-speak for “Please
    give me reasons to pay you less money.” Answer appropriately.

    is asshole.

87. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/76904ec460516db3e2c172644b34b616?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Diego October 29, 2011 at 4:58 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4087 "Direct link to this comment")

    What if we didn’t have the programmers?

    “…pretty sure you’ll look back in 5 years and wonder how you could
    be so arrogant…”

88. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/73cecc3a447a69ae7ebfb029e971d7a0?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    David October 29, 2011 at 5:18 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4089 "Direct link to this comment")

    “Showed It To Smart People” just about cried laughing.

89. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3fbcfb34856dfe2640e12a37b787ef69?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Wouter October 29, 2011 at 6:51 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4090 "Direct link to this comment")

    There are some good points buried in this post, in between all that
    Machiavellian psychopath babble. Overall, a decent enough read; and
    I’m I don’t know you.

90. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ae49eb9e696366fa81ba756ad3d7d7d4?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    ADnD October 29, 2011 at 7:17 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4091 "Direct link to this comment")

    “Perceptive readers will note that 100 does not actually show up on
    a d100″

    <– Your geek card is confiscated ; ) (like the other person, I quit
    reading at that precise point ; )

91. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3cce0a0c048420387865d35551971725?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    bit October 29, 2011 at 7:30 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4092 "Direct link to this comment")

    Reading through the negative comments is tiring.

    \1. To think that you can get by without following any of the advice
    laid out in the article, you’d be in the minority. I can’t believe
    that the majority of “programmers” out there will achieve career
    satisfaction without first recognizing for themselves the ultimate
    value of their output to humanity. Sure, you’ll be happy for a long
    time just to be coding in ignorant bliss, but at some point a lot of
    people will be looking for something more. I’d like to think (again,
    another assumption) that the people who don’t end up looking for
    more and maintain happy lives are in the minority and simply were
    able to find their happiness elsewhere (such as from family) to make
    up for the drudgery of their work-life.

    \2. The world isn’t run by programmers. It’s that simple. This
    article merely aims to give you a different perspective. We’d like
    to think that we live in a perfect meritocracy, but the truth is
    that the career progress of the majority of programmers are in the
    hands of non-programmers. We need to recognize that and make sure
    that we cater our services to them. They are, after all, our
    clients.

    I know a good chunk of people out there are perfectly happy being
    “programmers” and being seen that way by the outside world (in fact,
    I’m very good friends with a lot of such people), but you have to
    recognize that not everyone is like that.

    Just because you disagree with the author’s beliefs doesn’t make
    them any less true. Also, you just have to accept that the fact that
    some truths don’t apply to everyone. If it doesn’t apply to you, it
    likely applies to someone else, so don’t be so negative about it.

92. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0381c785425919c28203f39104971fb8?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    regeya October 29, 2011 at 7:59 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4093 "Direct link to this comment")

    “I couldn’t help thinking I’d like to see something with this tone
    of voice directed at the \#occupy movement.”

    Hey, OWSers, you don’t want to direct your anger at the banks;
    direct your anger at coders, instead, because their job is to
    eliminate jobs.

93. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/56129f3c280774ca475514114efef68f?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Laslo October 29, 2011 at 8:03 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4094 "Direct link to this comment")

    Good post but I think you should really read this:
    [http://susam.in/blog/re-infosys-tcs-or-wipro/](http://susam.in/blog/re-infosys-tcs-or-wipro/).
    It has a completely different view point than yours. I’m not really
    favoring one post over the another but a healthy debate is a good
    thing.

94. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a05f585eb2c8ba676e4b5e67f43523d6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    coolingfan October 29, 2011 at 9:06 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4096 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thanks for all the advice. I’m starting my first non-academic work
    in a week and I feel like there are a lot of “business” skills that
    I need to hone.

95. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/85a7f899244bcc54f916163b5790c175?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    JohnK October 29, 2011 at 9:10 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4097 "Direct link to this comment")

    This was good advice for all engineering folks. It should give most
    of us something to think about irrespective of whether we believe
    everything that was written. Self Promotion is a necessity for your
    career and your business. Know how business works, like profit vs
    cost centers. Playing with fun stuff is okay but it should not be
    the do-all and end-all. Engineers as a whole are terrible at helping
    each other out. Yes life is competitive but help each other network.

96. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/99d1f4cacc8f2354a928def6fc10e8f6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Ardhi October 29, 2011 at 9:52 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4098 "Direct link to this comment")

    “This blog is about the business aspects of running Bingo Card
    Creator, a small software company. Want more great articles? I keep
    a list of my best work curated. A brief summary of the last few
    years is available here. If you like what you see, I encourage you
    to sign up for the RSS feed. Thanks for visiting!”

    And you said about that startups is not a good place to work for
    money? I bet you dont have any employees right now.

97. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6e10c56f2c77e467a3f0c2a5ca409da3?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Faturita October 29, 2011 at 9:53 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4099 "Direct link to this comment")

    I found a lot of true in your post, but I do not think it is a good
    idea for engineers to follow the path that you are suggesting in it.
    If you want to be good at negotiation, marketing, etc, well, you
    should have studied business instead of engineering. Let the people
    with MBAs work out all the business things, and we will keep going
    making the world spinning and get the money that we deserve for
    doing that.

98. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/aa7afacc8bc1adf3c71007bf35f663a4?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Drake P October 29, 2011 at 9:53 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4100 "Direct link to this comment")

    Just read the entire article. I’m gonna bookmark this and re-read it
    when I’m done with school and looking for work. Hopefully it will
    save me from a few things. Also, I loved your summary of Social
    Network.

    “The first hour of the Social Network is about making a CRUD app
    seem like sexy, the second is a Lifetime drama about a divorce
    improbably involving two heterosexual men”

99. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6fb542531d1e2dd88e4d5123024fda02?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Catelu October 30, 2011 at 4:12 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4102 "Direct link to this comment")

    Yes, you really want to be in a profit center. Because you’re so
    smart that you hire some indians to design smart phones, you hire
    some chinese to manufacture them and then you sell them to the same
    indians and chinese at five time the price.\
     But do you really think it will take long for them to realize that
    they can sell them themselves and “outsource” you?\
     I would say people who bring the most value in a product should be
    best compensated, and most value doesn’t mean selling or “signing
    checks”. It’s a matter of time to see this happen.

100. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a98fcaae47201ec16df11f0fa7f1a976?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Andrew Underwood October 30, 2011 at 4:15 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4103 "Direct link to this comment")

    You hit the nail on the head. As a business leader in a number of IT
    companies I provide this advice to each graduate I meet.

101. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c1ae031356d61509c1e12593563f937d?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    elh October 30, 2011 at 4:54 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4104 "Direct link to this comment")

    I’ve come to that conclusion too late , I’m 34 and my entire focus
    was to do a better job, to become a better programmer as the lack of
    social skills leaves withno familiy, frieends,gf or what not.\
     Then I came to the conclusion it doesn’t matter , nothing matters
    anymore, I don’t matter,if I don’t make a difference then I consider
    myself as allready dead. I don’t think I would have believed this
    post in the begining, as not having a goal of delivering bug free
    software seems like a hack, non ethical, but its true no one cares
    really. I have a few more decades to think how I would spend my
    prison sentance beyond work, maybe ill find something.

102. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f06fcdba81e8ab57d6cabe65dee18b52?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Name October 30, 2011 at 5:53 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4106 "Direct link to this comment")

    The comments that I skip first are the ones starting, or even just
    somewhere containing, the magic “skip me please” phrase. You know
    the one: “tl;dr”.

103. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0fed5fdd2cff89505ef90bb560aff33e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Captain America](http://www.google.com) October 30, 2011 at 6:05 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4107 "Direct link to this comment")

    Bug: “lead” instead of “led”, at least twice.

104. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a562b9f78517a51a392019ffe13900e1?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Sheila October 30, 2011 at 6:29 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4108 "Direct link to this comment")

    To the people thinking that this advice isn’t good for real
    programmers who enjoy writing code — You might love to program, but
    without the authority to decide how to implement the solutions to
    the problems you will enjoy solving you will have to implement what
    you get told to. (or ignore what you are told, and see if you can
    get away with it–you might be able to)

    Even if you do get lucky and get to design something and work on it
    all the way to production deployment, other people in the company
    won’t immediately look to you for the next interesting project.

    This gets really old after a while. I’m at a point where this
    happens, and I’m ready to reboot and find a new job with lessons
    learned or at the very least learn how to be thought of as someone
    people will think of when interesting problems come up at my current
    company.

105. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4b3449f3ee4f1da8024980dcd1543427?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Ender October 30, 2011 at 6:42 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4109 "Direct link to this comment")

    Spot on.

    For everyone that reacted negatively and with powerful emotion, you
    I recommend taking a moment to ask yourself why this upset you so
    much. I would suggest that there is great value in the answer to
    that question.

    If you think you are a super programmer that will get the corner
    office with low lights and squishy carpet due to your superior
    skills, you are sadly mistaken. The guys that make their way learned
    what this post details. Don’t typecast yourself and be well rounded.
    People that are good at one thing (programming) get paid for doing
    one thing well. People that are good at a lot of things
    (programming, analysis, management, communication) are hard to find
    and are paid for doing a lot of things well…which means a LOT of
    money. If you say that money doesn’t matter to you, it means you are
    probably still living with your parents, don’t have a wife, and
    certainly don’t have kids.

    Keep up the good work. Best post I have read in a long time.

106. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/01b9e7d6f261ef430cb4026b42e02867?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [John](http://horsebits-jrc.blogspot.com/) October 30, 2011 at 6:47
    am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4110 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thanks for this article. I retweeted it before I finished reading
    the whole thing. Also, nice talk at BoS2011.

107. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8fc7d2f50f578837b595ac9431dc7a7e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Rafael October 30, 2011 at 6:54 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4111 "Direct link to this comment")

    I really enjoyed reading the points made here.

    Now, allow me to also give you a piece of advice to your career:\
     Hold the narcissist inside of you.\
     Also, you do not need to show excessive criticism to gain respect
    from others (although, it may work with some particular kind of
    people).

108. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/24df5936a33376c9bf1086cb23df4bb5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    nobody October 30, 2011 at 6:58 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4112 "Direct link to this comment")

    Well although very harsh I also agree to most of the points
    described above.

    I recently got in to one of the biggest IT corp in the world and
    belive me its such a boring and unexicting stuff that I am told to
    do. They just kill you enthu and confidence and some time I think of
    quitting this field itself.

    But then you just cant keep blaming the system. There are lot of
    exciting stuffs there. You just need to seek it…

109. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d1fae4916c7af2834948e629fd59b522?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Bret October 30, 2011 at 7:08 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4113 "Direct link to this comment")

    You guys should also read the awesome discussion about this post
    going on at reddit:
    [http://www.reddit.com/r/programming/comments/lsyok/dont\_call\_yourself\_a\_programmer/](http://www.reddit.com/r/programming/comments/lsyok/dont_call_yourself_a_programmer/)

110. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b9e70232bec156651113447155d9a383?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    anonymous October 30, 2011 at 7:31 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4115 "Direct link to this comment")

    nonsense

111. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f4068cfa5fb644c34a71c7f6c712b02e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    fra October 30, 2011 at 7:54 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4116 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great post!\
     Should be teached at school =)

112. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/88856e91e63c206d7a434ca88045ed71?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Jos Visser](http://google.nl) October 30, 2011 at 8:00 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4117 "Direct link to this comment")

    I am truly amazed by some of the negative comments on this blog
    post. I got 25+ years of experience, worked at small companies, at
    big companies, at my own company and currently work at Google and
    the only thing I can say is that this blog post contains a lot of
    great advice, truly useful insights and some gems that made me rofl.

113. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9587151c8d23c7343533c6202d4ad5d5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    keven October 30, 2011 at 8:09 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4118 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great article & spot on! I’ve been a developer for 11+ years and
    have always found a balance between moving forward and being happy.

    So you’re a programmer because programming makes you happy?

    Awesome! But why do you need a job to program? As though they are
    mutually exclusive? You could be a Subway sandwich artist and STILL
    program till your heart’s content.

    You should be focused on your “career”, not your hobby. Heed these
    words: “Work to live, don’t live to work.” or you’re on a fast track
    to being miserable and burned out.

114. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a81a108522f894bbe6c6d14d0d90739b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Doug](http://concretemulticore.wordpress.com/) October 30, 2011 at
    8:19 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4119 "Direct link to this comment")

    Nice post.\
     To shorten the section on Stock Options and Equity. It does not
    matter, negotiate a good salary and treat options as an occasional
    nice bonus or surprise.\
     I have made enough on options over the years to buy a car. Not a
    nice car, but pay off the minivan. Never be dazzled by the stock.\
     As an individual contributor, you get maybe 0.1 percent of the
    total stock. A founder or investor is getting 20-30. A top hired gun
    CEO about 5. You payout will barely be worth the tax hassle.

    The technology is easy. Never forget that. If you know what people
    will buy, you can build it.

115. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d1bb1c46683aa8b098acf129f7d9b808?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    tr00don October 30, 2011 at 9:33 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4120 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is a very interesting write up. I wonder though if those few
    people who began low and ended among the world’s billionaire elite
    today ever followed such rules. I think they actually broke every
    rule they could and still do. Sure, some of them didn’t make it to
    tell their stories. But my point is, rules are for followers.

116. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b5dcb5c7610d9764e58bc66da8a438dd?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    tom October 30, 2011 at 10:57 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4122 "Direct link to this comment")

    happiness is a warm gun

117. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5bd33c3ed83b5db53d6481908861f625?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    RubyPanther October 30, 2011 at 12:47 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4124 "Direct link to this comment")

    Shorter version:

    Resistance is futile, derp derp derp, all your base, derp

118. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4f761bc88fb1bc56fea66258db5454f0?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Troy K October 30, 2011 at 1:59 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4125 "Direct link to this comment")

    @NoName “Go die in a fire” person… if you’re a programmer, what do
    you think the purpose of your software is? A major point of software
    is to make business tasks more efficient. That roughly means your
    software makes things faster at the same price, or cheaper at the
    same speed. It means fewer people are needed to do the task. You are
    destroying job positions by programming. That doesn’t mean you cost
    people a job. It means they can now focus on the less-mundane and
    more important and rewarding things they do. I’ve been doing this
    for a while, and the places my software runs didn’t fire people once
    I automated their tasks. They moved them to more important things.

119. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2b543ba6ae1efa63a7a31184db4090a6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Michael Giambalvo October 30, 2011 at 2:01 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4126 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is a fantastic article, one I wish I’d read 10 years ago, but I
    have to take issue with this:

    “If you genuinely would enjoy that lifestyle, go nuts. If you only
    enjoy certain bits of it, remember that many things are available a
    la carte if you really want them. For example, if you want to work
    on cutting-edge technology but also want to see your kids at 5:30
    PM, you can work on cutting-edge technology at many, many, many
    megacorps”

    In my (limited) experience, it’s the megacorps that will treat you
    like a cog and want to extract as much value from you as possible.
    They’ll “suggest” you work late and on weekends. On the other hand,
    both startups I worked at had a very flat organizational structure
    and understood the importance of work/life balance and preventing
    burnout.

    Not saying that’s the universal experience, but there are plenty of
    startups where everyone clocks out at 5:30pm, and plenty of
    megacorps where everyone works weekends. It’s important to remember
    that when you interview, you are also interviewing the company.
    Figuring out how much they respect their employees is one of the
    pieces of information you’re trying to pull out of your interviewer.

120. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e300cef6749ed8a0c24677ab8f5467f2?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Cristobal October 30, 2011 at 2:42 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4128 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great post Patrick.\
     Thanks for this useful piece of advice, I really enjoyed reading
    this post.

121. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7eddf4221916bf0a01762f6d2adaabd3?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Kat October 30, 2011 at 3:07 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4129 "Direct link to this comment")

    this was just a too depressing, I don’t want to live in your world.

    I started programming with desire to create something beautiful like
    an artist painting a picture… if not this than whats the point in
    even trying? I don’t give a damm about the money long as it pays the
    rent.

    so please don’t believe we all have the same moral values as
    yourself.

122. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c510febb9bed68b5cc4a09f076701e0f?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [anon](http://www.anon.com) October 30, 2011 at 3:16 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4130 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is literally the most ill-informed and shallow-minded “advice”
    I’ve ever seen on the internet. Kids, don’t listen to this moron.

123. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/be0d081ce5bb8569a952ed884d418157?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Corbin Dallas Multipass October 30, 2011 at 4:36 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4131 "Direct link to this comment")

    Does anyone else find his software stack advice very dangerous? The
    entire point of a company investing in a software stack is so \*the
    company\* has a familiar point of entry to problems its employees
    might encounter. So when he says:

    “Want to get trained on Ruby at a .NET shop? Implement a one-off
    project in Ruby. Bam, you are now a professional Ruby programmer —
    you coded Ruby and you took money for it. (You laugh? I did this at
    a Java shop. The one-off Ruby project made the company $30,000. My
    boss was, predictably, quite happy and never even asked what
    produced the deliverable.)”

    I am quite sure that the other developers at the Java Shop will be
    thrilled they have to learn Ruby all of the sudden when the software
    breaks and the warranty is called in. That $30,000 is certainly
    worth covering the man hours of your coworkers learning and
    debugging an entirely different language plus the ill will sowed
    between your and your coworkers over them having to do so. And that
    of course will go a long way in developing your career, annoying all
    your coworkers like that.

124. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/be0cf3605817ed3839061421303ee896?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Srini Kadamati](http://linkedin.com/in/srinivasakadamati) October
    30, 2011 at 6:10 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4133 "Direct link to this comment")

    Patrick,

    Great post! I’m a business / math guy who loves to hack around with
    different languages and I’ve always considered dropping business to
    pursue a CS degree instead. I’ve realized, both thanks to this
    article and other people I”ve talked to in the industry, that nobody
    gives 2 pinches of salt what you major in. I interned at a startup
    and their CTO was an english major who just was good at coding.

    I posted this on my Data Structures message / question board (we use
    Piazza.com for it) and I hope it help open the eyes to some other
    students that are concerned about things like a BA in CS versus a BS
    in CS (UT Austin offers both).

    Lastly, Patrick, I couldn’t help to notice a bug in your code. I’m
    guessing you’re using Rails because instead of showing the current
    date, your post showed “”. Just giving you a heads up since nobody
    else pointed it out!

125. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/181af73262cc9cb9ea967bcf00ef1baa?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Bishwas Bhatta October 30, 2011 at 9:21 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4134 "Direct link to this comment")

    Wow….this is wisdom! if i had read something like this a year
    ago…i’d be richer by few thousand bucks!

126. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2101d75ccd71c5dfb984991a7ba53b9b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Harm October 31, 2011 at 3:26 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4136 "Direct link to this comment")

    God this was good. The parts about Salesforce and the Marxist
    academic brought me to tears (of joy). You rule.\
     I’m going to print this a hundred times and hand it out on the
    streets.

127. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/88fdff92424a9fd54a5be24b0685c29b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    NoBit October 31, 2011 at 5:15 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4137 "Direct link to this comment")

    Stunningly perceptive post. Thanks you, Patrick.

128. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0fd02b489a099066a60cef1af051c85c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Brianw October 31, 2011 at 5:31 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4138 "Direct link to this comment")

    ” It is ; you can find these people online…”

    Didn’t know if this was intentional or not, but still funny! :-D

129. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0fd02b489a099066a60cef1af051c85c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Brianw October 31, 2011 at 5:33 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4139 "Direct link to this comment")

    The software stripped out the code, but what I posted was a quote
    from you’re article that appeared to have application code that has
    been HTML encoded, which I assumed you meant to be interpreted as
    code (not literal text).

130. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fc749311b3831921de748ec85a8c1290?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [CHLTX](http://chl-tx.com) October 31, 2011 at 6:00 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4141 "Direct link to this comment")

    @Doug : Patrick may be still wet behind the ears, but for the most
    part, he’s dead on. I’ve been slinging code for nearly 40 years now,
    and I’ve learned most of the above the hard way. Reality may bite,
    but ignoring reality bites harder.

131. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fc749311b3831921de748ec85a8c1290?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [CHLTX](http://chl-tx.com) October 31, 2011 at 6:07 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4143 "Direct link to this comment")

    “How do I become better at negotiation? This could be a post in
    itself.”

    Yup. I got my current position after attending a negotiation seminar
    (which for me was mostly a review), and turning down 3 inappropriate
    offers. For the insultingly low one, I merely terminated the
    interview and told the hiring manager that I would not be working
    for him. After his 2nd follow-up phone call, I asked him to put me
    on his permanent do-not-call list.

    It wasn’t covered by Patrick, but I believe that the most important
    tactic to use in negotiation is “win-win, or no deal.”

    …which could be blog-fodder for me…

132. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/de87292b3bd7ff2f1430f31f5aa84101?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Daaron October 31, 2011 at 6:11 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4144 "Direct link to this comment")

    Very well done post. It had me laughing and agreeing at almost every
    sentence. It’s obvious that several of the other posters that they
    have great trouble understanding sarcasm and lack the tools
    necessary to comprehend that all communications are transactions.
    Each one of the bolded items could easily be chapter and the post
    made into a book. With your wit, I think it would do well.

133. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e2d9a82e16a23b2e894957c96bb74afd?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jason Fisher October 31, 2011 at 6:33 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4145 "Direct link to this comment")

    I think I agree with every single point made. I’ve been in IT for
    years, at startups (yes, employee \#2), at mega-corps, and at
    privately held small companies, and the key in every case was to
    understand that as a developer or manager I am bringing business
    value to the people writing my checks. Even if they’re still paying
    me but I’m no longer bringing value to the organization (yes, this
    happens), it’s just no value to me to be doing that work anymore. I
    don’t like the corporate culture, but that’s my lifestyle
    preference; I can work for the 60,000 employee shops, but I choose
    not to as much as I can.

    As to majors and language choices, I’ve been a developer and problem
    solver for many years, starting right after I left academics with a
    Master’s in Classical Greek and Latin … degrees and GPAs were simply
    irrelevant once I started solving business problems for people by
    creating usable database applications.

    Great post and thanks for covering so many bases with it!

134. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/339fb2e104efb4d1197f37f7aa2b024c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jason Gayda October 31, 2011 at 6:51 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4146 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great read! I can’t help but agree with 99% of your post

135. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1446f8bb3c44d2e6c57b7ae6d3f4f1c8?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    John Wilbur October 31, 2011 at 7:12 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4147 "Direct link to this comment")

    Probably is spelled probably, not provably. Saw that at least twice.
    None-the-less, this is a very good, if very long article on what
    really matters, if money and the prestige, perks, and power it gets
    you.

    I have worked for mega-corps all my career — 30+ years. I love
    programming, but have a degree in engineering (not software), an
    MBA, a CPA, and have spent about 3/4 of the time doing trivial (to
    me) stuff that makes money, or saves costs for the mega-corps. The
    other 1/4, actually “programming” or (less interesting) managing
    programming teams. If you want to make money, get an MBA, manage a
    team, or better yet a Profit Center. But know it will be less fun.

    Great article! I’m sending it to my kids, who may profit from it.

136. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3479186083b3edc500b9bafca0af7484?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Danny](http://www.toblender.com) October 31, 2011 at 7:49 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4148 "Direct link to this comment")

    Great advice.

    Especially the part about how good you negotiate is how much you
    make.

    That is so true. Instead of taking that course on compiler
    optimizations, take one on negotiation. You’ll make way more money.

    The biggest problem with Software developers is that they lack sales
    skills. You have to sell in order to succeed.

137. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7ae2527f0ed3bf6e61b4438abb94d34e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Pablo](http://www.twitter.com/PabloMDiez) October 31, 2011 at 8:11
    am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4149 "Direct link to this comment")

    \*applause\*

138. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f58a44742aa894baabc1cc592b404637?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Dan Sutton](http://www.opwernby.com) October 31, 2011 at 8:15 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4150 "Direct link to this comment")

    Hmmm… I’m a programmer, and I have been for 32 years. It says so on
    my résumé, which is 20 pages long, or something, and lists projects
    which go back to the early ’80s, when everyone programmed in machine
    code and lived in the forest, and nobody lived anywhere else. In my
    career, I’ve met maybe two people who can do what I do. Maybe.

    Every now and then, I change a byte of my résumé and resubmit it to
    monster.com, just for kicks: I then get 15 phone calls a day for a
    week or so, with people on the other end of the phone desperate to
    hire me.

    I think what you should be saying is, “Don’t call yourself a
    programmer if you’re a crappy programmer”. The fact that 90% (and
    I’m being generous here) of programmers are barely capable of
    spelling “programmer” lends some weight to what you’re saying, but
    real programmers (all three of us) need not take any notice of what
    you’ve written: that I’m even replying to it is largely due to the
    fact that I obviously haven’t had enough coffee this morning.

139. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/74d4a8548c2cd55eec4c13a7380711c1?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Wayne Kenneth Seymour III October 31, 2011 at 8:16 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4151 "Direct link to this comment")

    Wow. I have been fortunate enough to have been taught by elder
    engineers on these principles.\
     However, I’ve never seen a more succinct presentation on this info.

    I was taught; and had to learn over the years.

    Bravo.

    I’ll be reading this again from time to time, to remind myself.

140. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/068d42181b9d57bde2e8d27c7be42c9a?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Anoymous Coward October 31, 2011 at 8:22 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4152 "Direct link to this comment")

    Idunno, almost nothing you wrote rings a bell with me, and I can’t
    say I have been unsuccessful so far. For the last ten years, I did
    indeed almost exclusively LOB apps. IMO, what makes such a job nice
    or boring is what your take on the project at hand is.

    Now I’ve switched jobs, and work more on sort of infrastructure
    things. But the last project I did was a huge LOB app – a team
    comparable to us in size was not able to complete it in almost three
    years, in fact, all they did was a completely unmaintainable mess.

    We spent the first almost four months doing nothing but research.
    Then we completed the project in another ten month. At the end, it
    had proper documentation, a well defined, maintainable, highly
    modular and loosely coupled architecture, provided a services
    interface for third party apps which wasn’t even in the requirements
    (it just so happened that the services interface we used internally
    was easier to expose than to hide), it had quite good unit test
    coverage, code was generally reviewed and kept in accordance with a
    well defined standard, and it had its own huge battery of scripted
    tests. During the project, we had to implement a custom
    authentication and authorization system, a licensing system, we had
    to integrate foreign technologies and components, and define, verify
    formally, implement and test various algorithms. Now, if that’s not
    programming fun, nothing is.

    Had we gone the same way the team chose which tried its teeth on the
    project before us, it would indeed have been an extremely boring
    project, consisting mostly of CRUD code, tons of hand-crafted HTML
    and CSS, and hand-written Javascript which is anything but reusable
    or maintainable. But it was our choice not to do so. The customer
    was happy and we were even happier.

141. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/616835246f826c1ccf5a9475fc7019a0?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    anemet October 31, 2011 at 9:58 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4153 "Direct link to this comment")

    I like the post and before reading the comments :/( I thought this
    guy is a real tech/business genius :) but now i’m kind of
    “dilematic” so to speak… but I know I want to earn much more money
    then I currently do, so of course I’ll follow some of the advices :P

142. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1d83514d5e694ea5f01d985fd54cca8a?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Leonardo October 31, 2011 at 10:39 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4154 "Direct link to this comment")

    @The people who did not get the d100 joke\
     He isnt talking about the 2 D10 rolls, but the first D100s (yes,
    the ones that looked like a sphere) didnt have a “100″, but “00″
    instead.\
     And if you notice, he said 00-70, not 01-70, meaning he already
    included the “00″ roll. A “100″ would be a 101th side.

143. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5be86a9e1ea836b11929f0ff0c413d6e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Anonymous October 31, 2011 at 1:02 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4156 "Direct link to this comment")

    It’s funny to see people’s reactions to this article.

    People are either passionate about their profession or not.

    I strongly suspect that the author of this article is not. Because
    if you are, then you are likely also good at what you’re doing. And
    if you’re good at what you’re doing, it’s very difficult not to get
    paid for it (assuming, of course, that what you are doing is
    worthwhile to begin with).

144. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/80e6aa9870a32f160e126456c8142d14?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Alan October 31, 2011 at 1:18 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4157 "Direct link to this comment")

    For those who don’t appreciate this post because they prefer to
    think of businesses as full of people who are primarily concerned
    with the general welfare, this must sound harsh. Still, it won’t
    help you any if you are ignorant of the fact that this is basically
    how businesses think.

    Also, please read the last paragraph. The poster recognizes that the
    most important things are definitely not money or career.

145. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/783998cbc7d96a07229c240432d4091f?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    nuculerman October 31, 2011 at 1:37 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4158 "Direct link to this comment")

    I like how you use “profit center” and “cost center” in one breath,
    then decree buzz words are mostly useless in another.

    Why make this complicated? It’s not. It’s common sense at it’s most
    common. If you want a job you need to convince an employer that you
    can produce more than you cost them. It’s really that simple. It
    doesn’t matter if you call yourself a programmer, an aquatic
    marketer, or a disciple of Zorg; all any rational company is going
    to care about is that they’re profiting off you.

    Programmers have three means of producing: modeling, automation and
    software products. The first is much easier to quantify. The second
    is only easy to quantify if your work results in people getting
    fired. The second is the real reason “programming” is a dirty word
    for MBA’s, because even if you write code that saves $200k worth of
    man hours a year, you didn’t produce anything of value unless your
    manager fires $200k worth of salaried employees, or even scarier for
    a manager, comes up with $200k worth of new productive work to give
    current employees. The third is self explanatory, and easiest to
    quantify. If you’re in the first or third line of work, it doesn’t
    matter what you call yourself, as long as you make it clear you’ve
    produced more than you’ve cost. If you’re in the second, you’ll want
    to market yourself as a business consultant, and find a nice
    IT/Software consulting company to work for.

146. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6607b29d8a49e50fde9b075b7cec520d?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Experienced Developer October 31, 2011 at 3:49 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4159 "Direct link to this comment")

    I’d add one more tip:\
     Constantly improve yourself and your worth to the companies you
    work for. Do not rely solely on your employer to improve your skill
    set or keep your skills fresh. If you can get them to pay for time
    to improve yourself, then do it. If what they provide is inadequate,
    then take your own time and money to do it. It need not be
    extensive, the equivalent of a few days a year.

    Examples:\
     Attending training and/or conferences(speaking at conferences for a
    bonus).\
     Reading relevant periodicals.\
     Attending and/or Networking at user groups and the like.\
     Take a new job that has excellent learning opportunities (like
    learning new tech, etc)

147. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9684ee5c4fce1380186e5347a198ae00?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Rrrroy](http://www.thirdwave.org) October 31, 2011 at 5:29 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4160 "Direct link to this comment")

    What Rudd-O Said:

    Lovin’ the haters in the comments. Such incidence of haters is
    usually a sign that your article is spot-on, and you struck a chord
    that really BUGGED people who are MISERABLE in their lives (which
    made them react negatively to your wisdom). Congrats on the post.

    Double spot on.

148. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c27013ff36d92e5b79fd813d308c30c9?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Pablo October 31, 2011 at 6:45 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4162 "Direct link to this comment")

    I have to say that I wish I have read this 15 years back. I have
    seen all of this happening time after time, and most of us are not
    prepared for negotiation. We foolishly believe that science and tech
    will drive our goals to the upper maximun profit, and to live
    happily ever after… sadly, no.

    Excelent piece of wisdom. Thanks for sharing, I’ll do my part on
    re-sharing it with my circles.

    Thanks, a lot

149. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ee4e4634e0679e9680dc8bfb4fe1edc6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Patrick\_Fan October 31, 2011 at 6:51 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4163 "Direct link to this comment")

    Patrick, great article, I agree with it all. I’m pretty sure you
    could expand this into a book. I was lucky enough to have a
    professor touch on some of these items, but most were hard lessons
    learned over the years.

    The two biggest promotions of my career involved bars. (IT folks
    really seem to like their beer.)

150. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/338996419974ceccc60cb2b103e18d8b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Mason](http://www.hirepulse.com.au) October 31, 2011 at 7:26 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4164 "Direct link to this comment")

    Really spot on advice, and like many of the commenters here I wish I
    had have read this at the start of my career. As someone with almost
    a decade of experience as a programmer and now running a startup
    with several other people, much of what is written here is the kind
    of perspective that you start to gain when you have to do all of the
    other things in business than just developing the product (the stuff
    that seems boring at the start of your career).

    Definitely bookmarking this blog.

151. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ab08f930d2c672f8472612e823d4afe6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Severian October 31, 2011 at 9:13 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4166 "Direct link to this comment")

    Having been a dev for \~10 yrs., I think this piece describes our
    industry’s version of what’s generally termed as “selling out.” A
    such:

    \1. Most people do it–see the 90% figure. Who knows, from skill or
    just plain luck, you might end up in the other 10%.

    \2. It’s the path of least resistance. I’d add that due to student
    loans/mortage/family, you may be forced to take this path.

    \3. You may be on the way without even knowing it. Your startup’s
    going to get big one day, right? What then?

    None the less, I think there still are times when it’s worth
    bleeding for a project, if it’s something in which you really
    believe, have ownership, etc.–there actualy are people who’ve death
    marched themselves to fame and glory, see folklore.org–but you have
    to be able to recognize burn out.

152. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a13d880b4f7a8f5b8a1505ab5c94a651?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Venkat October 31, 2011 at 11:39 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4169 "Direct link to this comment")

    Some points are exaggerated without any real intention. However,
    this post might be useful to those who don’t have any real goal in
    their life (may be like you? )

    “Your major and minor don’t matter” — How many company interviews
    you’ve attended to assure this? This basically applies to
    consultancy companies – but not product based companies.

    You speak about Programmers & Engineers in one place! There is hell
    a lot of difference between an engineer and a programmer – But your
    post shows that you’ve taken ‘Engineer’ as a synonym for programmer.
    Pity :(

    It is not necessary for you to graduate in B.S/M.S in Computer
    science to become a programmer! Do remember it.

153. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5222f005f72ad1480c4929741e356423?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Chris](http://www.codinglifestyle.com) November 1, 2011 at 3:06 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4171 "Direct link to this comment")

    Love it! What I would give to be the professor to teach reality 101
    and see all those young faces as I crush their dreams.

154. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2836b1b853fb51bffc674e7636780e10?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    bithead November 1, 2011 at 4:42 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4173 "Direct link to this comment")

    Whatever – just don’t call yourself an engineer. ‘Software engineer’
    is a term that shouldn’t exist period.

155. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a5243fbc93b63796c60e5a21714dc73e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Ben November 1, 2011 at 8:12 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4177 "Direct link to this comment")

    I’ve been reading your posts for a long time, and have used your
    advice to try and start my own microisv (MoodToolkit.com). Still
    have a long way to go, but your suggestions have already been a huge
    help.

    I think this post may be one of your best. You’re an outstanding
    writer, and you have a really good grasp of the way business
    actually works. Have you thought about writing a book?

156. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/07f2a57fc1bf6585bc68ec07d954e1d5?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Alex November 1, 2011 at 8:13 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4178 "Direct link to this comment")

    Advice for timpanists: don’t call yourself a percussionist. You
    aren’t hired to hit drums. Nobody wants that anyway. You are hired
    to \*create musical value\*. Most of that time will be spent
    counting silence. Therefore, you need a job title to reflect that.
    Besides, you are not defined by the instrument you have studied and
    practiced. Do timpanists make more or less than cellists? It doesn’t
    matter, since a good musician can pick up either in a matter of
    weeks, and in a year no-one will be able to tell that you haven’t
    been doing it all along.

157. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d2300b3e0354b2ec7cedede72ac666b4?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Charles Sovereign November 1, 2011 at 11:16 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4179 "Direct link to this comment")

    I didn’t read everything.

    But, the start is your RESUME, USE (e.g. Jobskills non-profit org.
    in Keswick Canada, that help all people with the whole job seeking
    JOB seneraio, the hardest JOB there is).\
     How to present your soft skills, the right objective, hard skills,
    etc.\
     Some you pay for some are free, but definitely seek them out and
    use them.

158. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cbabbef697850ecc216e0799d7a38413?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Tomasz November 1, 2011 at 2:26 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4180 "Direct link to this comment")

    What an outstanding and eye-opening read. Thank you.

159. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4b307ee50bf37b2c0d4441aa1e700e31?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Marleine](http://marleine.blogspot.com) November 1, 2011 at 4:40 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4181 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thank you for writing this!\
     Such perspectives are highly needed to help new grads see the full
    image. Sharing it around for sure!\
     As for my opinion, well I can’t say it yet as I have no experience,
    but I can definitively look back at this post few years from now and
    see where it lead me.

160. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/08b6be24d1462be2fb249be252acad73?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Christian Seppa](http://friendfeed.com/subbit) November 1, 2011 at
    10:59 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4182 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thanks for all the fish, and a great article, sirrah.

161. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/84a53efce14fd7086f6d0cbc1e7b33d7?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Spencer November 2, 2011 at 6:01 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4183 "Direct link to this comment")

    This post can best be described as a delicious cupcake sprinkled
    with rat droppings. Lot’s of awesome insight, but with a complacent
    and depressing conclusion. I choose to live to work. Fuck hobbies.

162. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6aba3428cb08739c6653af5278a31f83?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    atfalatktkb November 2, 2011 at 9:33 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4185 "Direct link to this comment")

    You hit the nail directly on the head. Great read.

163. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9e3cc0cb19a8902c755356ec634ecaba?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    wart November 2, 2011 at 4:49 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4186 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is bullshit.

164. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/798e8671018a329b81b3b18fea54a28e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [C Macintosh](http://natureboy153.wordpress.com/) November 2, 2011
    at 8:21 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4187 "Direct link to this comment")

    All in all, a great post. I’ve been in industry for 6 years now and
    still find it challenging to think in terms of what business value
    I’ve contributed rather than “I wrote and refactored a bunch of
    features” in order to negotiate for what-have-you. You have given me
    some good things to think about. Thank you!

165. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/19f3b79f9263b95f9be901c0b9f88bef?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Hans der Hase November 3, 2011 at 1:35 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4188 "Direct link to this comment")

    This post stirred up quite a controversy. I think the confusion and
    love-hate flamewar roots in a fundamentaly different definition of
    career.

    The love-gang (and the advise in the post) defines career as “do
    successful business and increase income and social status” while the
    hate-gang defines career as “find your passion and get really good
    at it”. Both are legitimate and can make a good living but they lead
    to different advise needed.

    The latter kind of career needs Andy Lester’ish “Land the Tech Job
    You Love” advice. The former needs advice like given by Patrick in
    this post.

    I think it’s important to keep an eye on the slightly malicious
    business aspects in any case. But I think this is as far as a techie
    has to go. One step further and it would be taking Robert Green’ish
    “48 Laws of Power” or Stanley Bing’ish “100 Bullshit Jobs” advice
    and that should be kept for the bullies and sociopaths of our world.

166. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/bd1b53eea1edbdfd3b3bd08d0fc09da0?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Mugo November 3, 2011 at 4:04 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4190 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thanks for the great post.

    Been in the ICT industry for 4 years and have witnessed the
    situations contained herein over and over.

    And you are spot on about a college leaver working for a start-up;
    be extra careful.

    I joined a start-up on my 1st real job as the 1st employee;
    technically (after the secretary). 4 months later I was thrown into
    a deep end undertaking and was 2 months later unceremoniously fired
    after ‘failing gloriously’ on the project….

    The advice contained herein is rather global too, (Im from Kenya;
    some third-world country at the horn of Africa)

167. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/10dc90193a41a40ab3fb7ea2bebf759f?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    ForskarGurra November 3, 2011 at 4:46 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4191 "Direct link to this comment")

    Well actually, some of the most important jobs are related to make
    other jobs (read: old ways of doing things) obsolete.

    Go back study some history if you don’t see that clearly.

    I bet some people considered entrepreneurs and inventors of the
    industrial revolution being “jerks” who took their jobs. But would
    we rather go back to before there were factories?

    It’s what really creates new value in society in the long run: being
    able to get more done while requiring less money and smaller
    workforce.

168. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4d0c223d840e2d691ca93c4a7cb11de6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Ice November 3, 2011 at 5:52 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4193 "Direct link to this comment")

    Work is about being of use to your company and dealing with people.
    Do both to the best of your extent.

    That’s it, no need to be so pessimistic about things.

169. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7b131f6d357f205834bc2d8f9258ca79?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Ben Inkster](http://www.geekinc.ca) November 3, 2011 at 7:36 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4195 "Direct link to this comment")

    This was an excellent post, Patrick.

    Based on your writing style and advice, I’d say that you’ve learned
    the lesson of not to sweat the haters. But, just to reinforce, DON’T
    SWEAT THE HATERS

    Your advice is sound, if a bit arrogant. I’m forwarding this article
    on to several engineer friends. These are guys who believe that if
    they don’t participate in corporate politics then they are not
    affected by them. They also are working 60+ hour weeks for salaries
    that are less than the people who work under them in their team.

    I think the reason for most of the negative reactions is because
    programming is perceived as an art – like writing prose. However,
    even with writing books, there are good authors who are starving and
    there are mediocre authors who make millions. It’s all about
    positioning and marketing yourself.

    In any case, great post.

170. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/025bf1a5ab3a46cb390757eee89658dd?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    m913 November 3, 2011 at 12:17 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4197 "Direct link to this comment")

    I am not a programmer. Nor an engineer. Nor a 20-something. I am a
    50-something lawyer working for a state government. Yet I can say
    with assurance that most of this advice is true. Especially the end.
    Do what you love, but learn the best ways to get the best return for
    doing so.

    By the way, I loved the two-sentence summary of The Social Network.

171. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/90291284ab79cd45c5c6e86bae3fd259?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jessica November 3, 2011 at 12:18 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4198 "Direct link to this comment")

    @ Dan Sutton: I’m happy you hadn’t had your coffee yet and forgot
    that you had more important things to do. That was a win, right
    there.

    On the bright side, this article made me laugh out loud. The number
    of spelling errors was pretty egregious even for someone who doesn’t
    “write and speak really, really well”. I mean, really, you didn’t
    even run basic spell check? The general lack of concision and
    organization was pink icing on top of the princess cake. I made it
    through the whole article, though, because I am a champion, and was
    procrastinating doing something even more unpleasant. I was sure
    that I was going to click on that bingo cards link and get re-routed
    to the website of a billionaire’s consulting firm, but nope, I got .
    . . bingo cards. This was like sparkles on top of the pink icing on
    top of the princess cake. Or maybe the whole thing is satire and
    none of us got it, a la Machiavelli? That would make me feel better.

172. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/dfb5e8c841d12e74ef05d3559cb7c319?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Dom Finn](http://www.dominicfinn.co.uk) November 4, 2011 at 5:17 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4201 "Direct link to this comment")

    Excellent post thanks. Only a certain type of person will read this
    and understand it. I don’t want to know the other types.

173. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2e29682d421ee74dac108e243dcff0d7?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Chris November 4, 2011 at 10:08 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4202 "Direct link to this comment")

    I stopped reading when you said “If you think that [the business of
    un-employing] is unfair, go back to school and study something that
    doesn’t matter.”

    I have no qualms with the business reasons for reducing employment,
    it’s called capitalism. There’s nothing unfair about it, but to
    claim other fields of study not fueled capitalism don’t matter is
    pathetic, short sighted, and the exact reason why engineers are
    ignored in political and cultural environments.

    Engineers in our time need a perspective into the future of
    technology through advanced science research. Engineers of our time
    need an understanding of art and design to incorporate into their
    products. (As companies like Apple have shown, there’s great
    capitalistic value in detail.) The best of our engineers need to
    have a worldview that opens up the possibilities of innovation, not
    boxes them into defined rolls. Sure, I haven’t said “programmer”
    yet, but at the end of the day there’s nothing stopping a programmer
    from doing just as great things.

    Scrolling through the comments, it looks like I was wise in not
    finishing reading. Oh well, wasted my time but there’s my $0.02

174. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ecad247c5b8d083ee2192d8f26e63ca1?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Siderite](http://siderite.blogspot.com) November 5, 2011 at 8:05 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4205 "Direct link to this comment")

    There is a big difference between advertising and the actual
    product. You are advocating to not **advertise** yourself as a
    programmer, but what one calls oneself is a deeply personal issue.
    So I will continue to call myself a programmer, enjoy mambo-jumboing
    on my mambo-jambo and generally life. And if some employer needs to
    call me something else and pretend I do something else that what I
    am actually doing and being good at, then I don’t think I would like
    to be employed there anyway. I am not living for the money and I am
    not “in a business”: I call it life.

175. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4c9c1fc4d0b8b967388085ca06376dc8?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    David Murphy November 5, 2011 at 11:24 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4206 "Direct link to this comment")

    Also worth remembering that the largest part of corporate software
    spend apart from packages is maintenance of the code created
    sometimes decades ago. And after that it is packages such as SAP.

    It’s still well paid and even if you end up a corporate drone, you
    will still be a relatively well paid one.

176. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ad2aeae9f2de192991400e2a7af9a415?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    RM November 5, 2011 at 3:38 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4207 "Direct link to this comment")

    The irony of this sort of career advice is (a) it will be better
    understood by folks more than halfway (if not completely) in sync
    with your career path and (b) you need to have really good timing to
    make good money, i.e. figure out when to don the suit vs jeans as a
    programmer to get that better-than-expected bump in pay.

    Things I agree:\
     - Networking: VERY essential, especially with like-minded
    engineers/computer scientists (I married one!)\
     - Negotiation: Its really an art that needs mastery. Talk to a
    relative who does sales and hang with him/her during some
    negotiation.

    Things I don’t agree / are missing:\
     - Startups don’t pay well: There are few that have good leadership
    and see the company through sales. More work for someone out of
    school. But, 6-7 years dev experience could make good money, hold
    good number of shares to see the company through sellout.\
     - Keeping up with news: Part of networking, but equally important
    is to check on industry trends and keep yourself on bleeding edge
    when possible. It keeps things fresh for you and shows foresight to
    your next employer.

177. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/334e7c4e35a4e0b12de248c7dc22aa90?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Marcel Sorger November 5, 2011 at 7:33 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4208 "Direct link to this comment")

    Interesting read, but lacking.

    While it’s true that Line of Business software runs the world and
    creating value or reduce costs are the main goals for creating it
    the departments might have different things they value. If a
    department has a fixed budget, like most staff departments have,
    being a match with the departmental culture may be much more
    important. Things like sociability and the maintainability of your
    code might matter much more.

    While it’s true that a programmer is not defined by a software stack
    a specialist most certainly is. Knowing the intricacies of a stack
    takes time as well as learning the library, tools, the places where
    you can get help and even mindset of it’s designers. Being a
    specialist might be more important for a temporary consultant than
    for a fixed employee, but specialist are generally paid more then
    generalist at any task.

    Switching language and tools is simply NOT appreciated by
    departments unless you are asked to do it. While I have seen
    experiments with a new language or tool the resulting applications
    had to be rewritten, otherwise they would not be maintained by the
    departments. A department ideally wants 1 stack to do everything, so
    it’s easy to swap people around with a minimal learning curve.
    Switching the stack of a department only happens when companies
    merge or when the technology is at it’s end but most of the time the
    new thing of the supplier is used like a move from ASP classic to
    ASP.NET

    If you experiment with a different stack on the side it could be
    perceived as a treat, because you might want to leave for a company
    that actually uses that stack or the company actually adopts it and
    then all your colleges have to learn something new and they lose a
    lot of status to you. Also by showing that you’re such a great
    programmer they might frame you in the “HOBBIEST” instead of the
    “PROFFESIONAL” category, witch means that you spend to much time on
    projects to make them overcomplicated.

    Coworkers and bossed aren’t your friends, but who is? Any idea how
    many marriages go sour or company founders are at each others
    throat? People like the illusion that they are your friend and it’s
    enjoyable to have that illusion yourself, but things change so
    always have an exit strategy ready or have leverage so you’ll be
    able to blackmail them into acting nice again. Keep a logbook and
    save your mail so you can find out later what you did and what
    others did. I think that having dossiers on your coworkers is a
    little to much, bordering on paranoia, but when push comes to shove
    you can dig trough your logs and email to create those.

    Startups are great for getting all round experience and finding out
    what you like, because they will have you do any job that just
    happens to be there whether you’re qualified or not, but don’t do
    them too long or you will go crazy. I’ve been involved in 4 startups
    and in my experience it was always total chaos, with clueless people
    winging it, creating way to much stress and emotion to do a complex
    job well. The meager rewards and frequent near bankruptcies, have
    made me place a premium on money forever.

    After having acquired some marketable skill, go into consultancy.
    You’ll be working for a number of companies a year mostly between 1
    and 4 so you can actually check out what kind of companies you like
    and how much you hate traffic. You’ll get a car, decent pay, a feel
    for the market, career coaching, some courses, insight in the
    development process and a network of former colleges. Mind you
    constancy companies make the largest margin on juniors, but wheel
    client in with seniors. Companies don’t want to make you senior
    because it costs them more, unless you can generate more business.
    This means that that they support you when you want to do courses
    but most of the initiative should come from you. After a couple of
    you will either quit because you spend too much time in your car and
    have to start over again and again, probably by having been taken
    over by a company you have been assigned to, or you are going to
    freelance, because your network has grown so large that you can find
    jobs yourself and cut out the middle man.

    These are just my thoughts, but does anybody have a different
    opinion or experience?

178. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/18ffa8375220ed88ea0f543350a23f83?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Nurp November 7, 2011 at 5:17 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4213 "Direct link to this comment")

    TLDR.

179. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/60549d4c3dc2e4f116c7c3a8d2d5fbcd?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    giga©loud November 7, 2011 at 9:39 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4214 "Direct link to this comment")

    Why sales is called as a profit center … don’t the sales guys earn
    salaries? don’t they spend lavishly on customers and submit heavy
    expense bills and go on fancy conference meetings? oh wait, I forgot
    about those fat commissions they earn … how come all this doesn’t
    count as a ‘cost’ to the company?\
     Just bringing in business doesn’t bring in ‘Revenue’. Revenue comes
    in only when the products are delivered. Its good products that
    brings in more business not just good sales guy. I think
    engineers(Programmers) are the actual profit centers for the
    company. They earn modest salary and company doesn’t have to pay
    them fat commissions.

180. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/aa91ab035440d236e55005a420588e1d?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Jay November 7, 2011 at 12:34 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4215 "Direct link to this comment")

    Patrick,

    You probably never have worked in a regular programmer type job in a
    corp, What you are preaching here is mostly bull siat.

181. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1ef3a563a35f0d83e5b99a1e1c54f6e7?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Bob](http://johnson@johnson.com) November 8, 2011 at 1:06 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4217 "Direct link to this comment")

    You and your kind in the culture of “corporate america” sound like
    Julia Roberts in “Pretty Woman” jive talking a client – a whore
    making themselves look good to score a trick. …And like Jason
    Alexander’s role as the conniving lawyer. …Bill Clinton comes to
    mind, as well. You may not all be, as you say, “sandwich artists,”
    but you are bullshit artists – all smooth talking, game playing,
    disingenuous, dysfunctional mind-fuckers, selling out their humanity
    for a dollar and status. So many coping mechanisms for working in
    such shit.

182. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d92b64b0bbc0f2b7297924e76c4a4a84?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Paul W. Homer](http://theprogrammersparadox.blogspot.com/) November
    9, 2011 at 10:56 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4221 "Direct link to this comment")

    Yep. But I do feel compelled to point out that although you are
    correct for most of the programming positions available, there are
    ways around all of these points in reality. For instance, it is
    possible to get a well-funded research-based programming job outside
    of academia (so the work isn’t directly about making money, but
    rather exploration and trying out new ideas). However, it’s
    extremely competitive and in order to get there, a person needs to
    understand all or most of the points you raised (particularly about
    being perceived as useful and networking). The best jobs never make
    it to the public and it takes a long time to establish enough of a
    reputation to be able to get yourself into consideration for them.

    Paul.

183. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/76abf6720b13982fa14f175e8347f48c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Roy November 9, 2011 at 2:52 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4222 "Direct link to this comment")

    That is a lot of very good advice. I have been a software engineer
    for 19 years (even before it was cool!!!) and I only realized much
    of that recently.

    In my experience, most people will never quit, no matter how much
    they are abused. I think at any given time, over 50% will claim they
    are “thinking about it”, but almost nobody actually will. When you
    are trying to negotiate a raise, the employer will be assuming you
    will not actually leave, therefore, your hand is weak.

    In my experience, the only way negotiation ends up in your favor is
    if they BELIEVE you are willing to walk. The only big
    raises/promotions I have been able to negotiate were over my letter
    of resignation, because I had already gone out and found another job
    and really am willing to go.

    If you try this, make sure your letter of resignation includes
    reasons they can do something about, in writing. Money, promotion,
    vacation time, benefits, etc. Then your leaving is THEIR problem,
    THEIR fault. If you don’t give solid logical reasons which can be
    addressed, only give verbal reasons, or just give a bunch of
    meaningless fluff reasons like “I hate it here”, they may decide
    they can’t stop you or it is just easier to let you leave and hire
    some new sucker.

184. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fdc9859e043277b51de47a6ea16ac13c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Smart Company Software](http://www.smartcompanysoftware.com)
    November 9, 2011 at 10:59 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4223 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is great stuff. It’s interesting to read how many people say
    you are spot on and how many say you are way off mark. Whatever the
    opinion, you’ve stirred up a lively debate!

185. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d63585cb2745d1ade9836116c293a234?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Aaron](http://www.aaronheld.com) November 12, 2011 at 9:17 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4225 "Direct link to this comment")

    I love the controversial tone in your post and by the comments your
    writing style is dead on for provoking discussion.

    I deal with this every day as an Engineering manager where I’m paid
    to deliver value to the business. I want to deliver it as a software
    craftsman and take pride in my work.

    It is about balance and priority. Nobody would have heard of
    Michelangelo if he had not had patrons paying for his art. I’m sure
    that there were plenty other employed renaissance artists whom we
    will never remember.

    So take pride in being a programmer, but remember that it is a job.

    Otherwise feel free to code as a hobby. My hobby work plays by my
    personal rules without being tainted by ‘business’.

    Hacking on an open source package for ‘fun’ and self-learning landed
    me 2 different jobs.

186. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9f6ff07fd07d2a5e95f62ee3cdcaf3a6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    rf November 12, 2011 at 2:29 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4226 "Direct link to this comment")

    I don’t know anything about start ups, so I can’t comment there, but
    most of the rest is spot on. The only real quibble I have is the
    advice that led to the title of the piece. When I hire programmers
    for our IT department, I don’t care what they call themselves. In
    fact the resume/application is only used for one thing-to decide who
    to interview. Once I’ve made that decision, it’s all about
    interview.

    One commenter likened the ‘selling yourself’ advice to a whore, and
    others have been less graphic, but the point is, you have less than
    one hour to convince me to hire you. We give a programming test to
    gauge your skills, but other than that you need to convince me that
    you really did those things you claim to have. I don’t know how many
    resumes I’ve seen that say something like ‘worked on team to
    optimize production distribution–saved company $5m per annum’ but
    when I get into the interview with them, it’s clear from their skill
    level and their lack on I depth knowledge of the project that they
    were one of those people that went to some of the meeting, but had
    little to do with the product. I also frequently have interviewees
    that can’t tell what they actually know or don’t, and because it
    going to take me $30-40k to find out (assuming I fire you in 6
    months because you can’t program) I’m not going to take a chance on
    you.

    It’s a fine balancing line between taking too little credit and
    taking to much, and some of us managers (bad word, but I was ‘peter
    principaled’ into the job) have gotten pretty good guessing, but
    meet us halfway and learn to communicate effectively.

    For those that dislike the overall thrust of the argument, perhaps
    you’re in the 5-10% that get to do the programmer-bohemian
    lifestyle, hopping from startup to startup, and if that’s the case,
    bully to you. But be prepared that it may not work for you, which
    means this advice will be helpful. Or you may prefer the stability
    of a job whose status isn’t dependent on whether the VCs came
    through with more funding. I went from running my own small
    business, to corporate when a change in my health status meant I
    could no longer deal the the possibility of not having health
    insurance, even for a short period of time. Marriage, kids,
    mortgages are other reasons people sometimes start looking for
    stability.

    -rf

187. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/53a2e1e5dba42ff50073424e5650eabc?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Deepak November 13, 2011 at 9:29 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4230 "Direct link to this comment")

    A lot of posts say “money is not the only thing in programming”.
    Yeah! Sure, say that to girls who have only completed high school
    but are earning more than you dump you.

188. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f2ead07c237f7715ee142f007fafbbf4?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Rolf Walko November 13, 2011 at 12:26 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4232 "Direct link to this comment")

    Pad Thai at Aw Taw Kaw Market (31 March 2009 by Michael)

189. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1a80020ad22db22ab9e417c15f5febd2?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    JamesOsaka November 14, 2011 at 4:41 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4233 "Direct link to this comment")

    Hey Patrick,

    Great post. Recently purchased your app sumo (Mixergy? can’t
    remember) interview on scalable content generation and came here…
    was interested as I’m based in Osaka

    Seems like most of the visitors are programmers here? I think you
    really have to try to look at the position of someone you is hiring
    you when you consider your title.

    As a mid sized business owner with the occasional project I would
    never employ someone who’s title was programmer.

    To me that means some kid who gonna write some crazy code and leave
    halfway through the project when there’s a new video game release…

    At a minimum I want to hire a small team or mid size group of
    software developers. That gives me the confidence that if someone is
    sick or on holiday my project isn’t screwed. Presumably there’s also
    a track record there..

    Testimonials and a good web presence are key too…

    So maybe business software solution provider would work? If you plan
    to work for a big company and want to be a cog in the wheel then I
    guess programmer is fine …

    In terms of the art and the utility of programming I would say that
    marketing yourself, your relationship skills and your coding are
    most important in that order.

    Patrick, hit me up for ebisu and takoyaki if you’re in Osaka….

    J

190. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2fd086942365d43bb3ea276b6d271cd1?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Bart](http://www.neglectdesign.be) November 14, 2011 at 12:52 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4235 "Direct link to this comment")

    Good stuff. I’ve been working as a consultant for plenty of IT
    companies and most of what you say is very true. Programmer just
    hits the wrong note with people that have no clue about anything
    else than synergy, efficiency and optimizing the value of service to
    stakeholders.\
     Go for developer, architect or Solution something or other. And
    when negotiating, pick a reasonable salary per month and add 500. I
    did this twice and was stumped to be hired. Impression counts, and
    having the balls to ask for a big salary gives an impression of
    competency.

191. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1ef3a563a35f0d83e5b99a1e1c54f6e7?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Bob November 17, 2011 at 10:37 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4239 "Direct link to this comment")

    rf on Nov. 12 – excellent and genuine, down-to-earth,
    in-the-trenches clarification and perspective without sounding like
    the author, a self-aggrandizing, slick (not in appearance) “big
    shot”/”playa.”

192. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2a2d7419dd35f108de8b19179e9215a6?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Fletch](http://www.saltwebsites.com/) November 18, 2011 at 2:24 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4243 "Direct link to this comment")

    About the first third of this post contains fascinating, correct,
    vital insight for its target audience (young developers). The rest
    of the post is interesting too. Is it true that programmer job
    applicants can’t program? Here’s what they asked me at my first job
    interview:
    [http://www.saltwebsites.com/2011/best-cs-graduates-can-even-write-hello-world](http://www.saltwebsites.com/2011/best-cs-graduates-can-even-write-hello-world)
    :-)

193. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/239c2112c9ebcd25a4ec7bd2fe99d76e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [够戏博客](http://blog.506c.com) November 19, 2011 at 10:20 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4246 "Direct link to this comment")

    各种压力，其实我也是个softer。、、。

194. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/26122870d6024b3aba857fbe137ec257?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Programmer December 4, 2011 at 6:47 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4252 "Direct link to this comment")

    Im programmer.

195. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/26122870d6024b3aba857fbe137ec257?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Programmer December 4, 2011 at 7:03 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4253 "Direct link to this comment")

    if I’m boss and build houses with my own hands I’m a bricklayer. I
    am proud to be a programmer. The shame is on those leaders who do
    not know how to build a wall with their hands. For it is certain
    that these lives the greed in their hearts.

196. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/70f99ba90dbd8a3cf622d9deb0a25317?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    letskeepthisanoymous December 8, 2011 at 2:53 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4257 "Direct link to this comment")

    This is a really good post.

    They taught us design patterns, etc at University and I was itching
    to be an agile engineer who plans projects, replans, then implements
    (software lifecycle and all that) but lets face it, there just isnt
    enough time. I get two weeks to build a new software system. While
    maintaining other software i inherited.

    Dont get me wrong I still want to build quality software but that
    just takes time.

    My approach before reading this was just to finish the software and
    fix bugs as they come up when users use the software.

    I felt rotten because all my programs are just lines of code with
    copy paste programming, repeating syntax countless times, loops
    inside loops inside loops – each making database calls…

    There really is not enough time to build it properly so i build it
    just to work now and intend to come back to it when things are
    quieter (if ever). This has assured me I am not a bad engineer, I am
    just solving business problems in as quick a time as possible…

197. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5dc47054458fa1d2c2580fcbd9209c9e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [human mathematics](http://isomorphismes.tumblr.com) December 8,
    2011 at 4:47 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4258 "Direct link to this comment")

    I really really liked most of this article. But negative feedback is
    the easier kind to give. You lost some eunoia with this line:

    > If you think that is unfair, go back to school and study something
    > that doesn’t matter.

    Do anthropology and astronomy “not matter”? Are you trying to imply
    that only college majors that lead directly to a well-paying job
    matter? Why assume college at all?

    If I try to clarify the argument behind the joke, it doesn’t pass
    muster. I liked computers, so now I am in line to make above-median
    money and therefore I should accept creative destruction or some
    other kind of economic social Darwinism?

    It doesn’t logically follow. And the quip, while sort of funny, is
    mostly just needlessly disparaging.

198. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/068d42181b9d57bde2e8d27c7be42c9a?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Another Anonymous Coward December 14, 2011 at 3:42 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4260 "Direct link to this comment")

    @dude: “plenty of real ‘programmer’ jobs where we are valued” – this
    value being expressed how? With soda? I don’t say there aren’t, but
    “plenty” is IMO a word too strong. The reason for this is a simple
    one, which the article’s author also fails to mention: 90% of app
    development is still CRUD. You don’t need highly skilled programmers
    for this type of work, you don’t need to pay them well, and you
    won’t get very good people interested in doing this work. So yes,
    most of the programming jobs in programming are crappy. But so they
    are in any other field. Most of all cooks work in crappy fast-foods,
    very few waiters work in high level restaurants, working on the
    assembly line of a car factory is as fun as staring at a white wall.
    And all of these jobs are also not paid well.

    @xivSolutions: some of us may have privacy issues which prevent us
    from using our real names. Your experience in the working world is
    obviously limited, if you didn’t think of this.

    Now, about the article: this is the world view of a programmer who
    doesn’t care about programming, who just cares about payment. Not
    sure how many of us (who call ourselves programmers) do programming
    exclusively for the money. While it is useful to be a good
    negotiator and communicator, that’s not what gives programmers
    professional satisfaction, it just makes getting obstacles out of
    the way easier. Do you think the architects who designed the many
    new stadiums and sport buildings in China for the last Olympics were
    motivated by money alone? Do you think the constructor workers who
    built these buildings took pride in the money they earned?

    Other than that, would you hire a pigmentation specialist to paint
    your house? Or a pipes and fittings expert to repair your heating? I
    don’t think so. Why then do you think you stand a better chance to
    get a good programming job by not calling yourself a programmer?

    The author does get some things right, but derives the wrong
    conclusion, IMO. Here are my thoughts, based on a career longer than
    his (and I’d say with more accomplishments, even if I can’t talk
    freely about them):

    Focusing on what you want instead of what your customer or employer
    needs is the safest way to not get any work at all.

    Programming is not about code, technology stacks, programming
    languages, nor is it about earning money. It’s about solving
    problems. Coding skills, stack knowledge, communication skills and
    any other skills, hard or soft, are useless if you’re not able to
    put them together to deliver working and usable solutions.
    Sometimes, providing a solution means actually scratching an itch.
    That’s it. Don’t take the job if you doesn’t make you happy.

    Being good in what you do (i.e. solving problems in a comprehensible
    and usable way) usually tends to get you a big salary, with little
    additional effort (actually, just finding an ad for a good job and
    going to the interview). Really sucking at what you’re doing won’t
    get you a big salary no matter how good a negotiator you are. It’s
    up to you where you want to invest your effort: in becoming a good
    professional, or in fighting for a position about what your skills
    would normally allow. The difference is like the one between
    developing your strategic capabilities to win a war versus focusing
    entirely on the current battle.

    Negotiation and communication are indeed critical for providing
    comprehensive, usable solutions (social and financial aspects are as
    important as technical ones), because without them the chances of
    sound requirements gathering are dim at best. But they aren’t
    enough. Besides, negotiation and communication is what gets
    obstacles out of the way, not what gives you professional
    satisfaction, if you’re a programmer who actually likes programming.

    You spend more than half of your waking time at work (if you’re a
    programmer, more like three quarters of it). Money can only improve
    the time you don’t spend at work up to a limit. This won’t
    compensate for spending the time you spend working in a crappy
    environment, with people you don’t like, in bad working conditions,
    or having to obey heavily bureaucratic regulations – these being
    specific to any large company.

    In brief: get very good at comprehensibly solving customer problems,
    and success will come your way. Think about money first, and you’ll
    never get really successul as a programmer.

    Henry Ford, almost a century back, expressed some thoughts about
    success in any profession in a very nice way:

    The man who will use his skill and constructive imagination to see
    how much he can give for a dollar, instead of how little he can give
    for a dollar, is bound to succeed.

    If money is your hope for independence you will never have it. The
    only real security that a man will have in this world is a reserve
    of knowledge, experience, and ability.

199. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/159bb5eb04d639e755ae7c1ac685bd3e?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Karen December 15, 2011 at 8:59 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4261 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thanks Patrick!

    Your advice is priceless & timeless. Granted, it is not for
    everyone. Some people live with blinders on. Why else would someone
    (\~80%) work at a job they hate, or for a company they despise for
    most or their entire lives?

    That you’ve sold out and are miserable? I don’t think they
    understood your position on the matter.

    I greatly enjoy your writing style. Keep up the good stuff!

200. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b337c07b85e16ce57b12b7bfe2467169?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Atendimento online para seu website. Suporte via chat para
    atendimento a
    clientes](http://www.atendimentoonline.net/?pagina=home) December
    19, 2011 at 11:13 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4263 "Direct link to this comment")

    That is really attention-grabbing, You are an overly professional
    blogger. I have joined your feed and sit up for in quest of more of
    your great post. Also, I’ve shared your site in my social networks

201. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d0d2206c917b30b7638990ec591ece93?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Shorten urls service make money](http://www.Hit.my) December 20,
    2011 at 8:15 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4264 "Direct link to this comment")

    great post, very informative. I ponder why the other experts of this
    sector don’t notice this. You must proceed your writing. I’m
    confident, you have a huge readers’ base already!

202. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1de60cfbaf7f43049d76d54fd9f58371?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [peace, love, emphaty](http://emphaty.co.cc/about/) December 26,
    2011 at 10:38 pm
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4265 "Direct link to this comment")

    F\*ckin? amazing issues here. I?m very happy to peer your post.
    Thanks so much and i am looking forward to touch you. Will you
    please drop me a mail?

203. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e4f64708b5a4a3ce4cca386eddaa150c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [fittings pipe](http://www.alvindocs.com/inquiry/) December 28, 2011
    at 2:41 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4266 "Direct link to this comment")

    Thank you for another informative website. The place else could I am
    getting that type of information written in such an ideal means? I
    have a challenge that I am simply now operating on, and I’ve been at
    the glance out for such information.

204. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7ac292e4f8410ccf3b1abd5f0fb1d8cb?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    n.podbielski January 4, 2012 at 9:19 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4268 "Direct link to this comment")

    Oh hell… I am quite good in what I do and I am (suprise!) and I am
    lack of communication skills and self estime…\
     …and damn, you’re right that world sucks because all of this ‘i
    know x languages and have nice CV does’not matter. Mostly matters
    that what I am not good at: communication, and ability to sell my
    self as good, valuable employee.

205. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7cf5876e46a8721f7b046b4a13dbef95?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Free file games and programs on
    http://zabig.ru/](http://Games,music,software,film,cool,whaha)
    January 6, 2012 at 2:16 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4269 "Direct link to this comment")

    Hello there, just Free file games and programs on
    [http://zabig.ru/](http://zabig.ru/)

206. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/833f79267cf2f1829bd86ff2f113516b?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [The DNA7 Project x86
    v.1.5](http://movir.in.ua/index.php?do=pm&doaction=newpm&user=138)
    January 7, 2012 at 2:20 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4270 "Direct link to this comment")

    Hello, i think that i noticed you visited my site thus i got here to
    go back the want?.I’m trying to to find things to improve my
    website!I guess its adequate to make use of some of your concepts!!

207. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/806670f7d51710efb57ebcc4edaf168c?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    [Adeline](http://www.d9radio.com) January 9, 2012 at 9:17 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4271 "Direct link to this comment")

    I actually find the post entertaining..Comments are lined up,
    therefore many people have experienced the points mentioned in the
    post and was able to relate to it. However, the outcome of our
    careers does not rely on one factor, it is influenced by several
    interrelated factors. Sometimes, even if we work really hard and we
    are fit for the job, things just don’t go our way.

    [](http://www.d9radio.com)

208. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/852bfcd82ad79fc0ea2be29122b92086?s=40&d=wavatar&r=G)

    Karthik January 12, 2012 at 4:59 am
    [\#](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/#comment-4272 "Direct link to this comment")

    Being a person who has been development( I am not a programmer ) for
    some years now and this has been one of the most interesting
    articles on how the IT industry works. Some of the other articles
    that have been linked like
    [http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/FindingGreatDevelopers.html]
    focusing on boons and banes to find great developers which was
    another nectar for an aspirants in development.

### Trackbacks/Pingbacks

1.  [Appreciate thyself |
    jjfiv](http://jjfiv.wordpress.com/2011/10/29/appreciate-thyself/) -
    October 28, 2011

    [...] just came across this article Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer
    courtesy of the programming tag at Delicious, which I frequent via
    my RSS [...]

2.  [How Fresh Graduates Can Grow | Swaroop C H - India, Technology,
    Life
    Skills](http://www.swaroopch.com/blog/how-fresh-graduates-can-grow/)
    - October 28, 2011

    [...] Update on 29-Oct-2011: Also read this great article by Patrick
    McKenzie (a.k.a. patio11) called “Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer,
    And Other Career Advice” [...]

3.  [Industry 101, what college does not teach
    you.](http://cscpcc.org/2011/10/29/industry-101-what-college-does-not-teach-you/)
    - October 28, 2011

    [...] how to surve as a programming in the real world. This is a
    must read for any would be programminer. Don’t Call Yourself A
    Programmer, And Other Career Advice by Patrick McKenzie << What is
    the Cloud and [...]

4.  [Career Advice | Delightfully Distinctive
    COLRS](http://ddcolrs.wordpress.com/2011/10/29/career-advice/) -
    October 28, 2011

    [...] Patrick’s Blog, Oct [...]

5.  [“Don’t call yourself a programmer.” « Aaron J.
    Wilkins](http://aaronjw.com/2011/10/29/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    - October 29, 2011

    [...] “Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer.” Share
    this:TwitterFacebookLike this:LikeBe the first to like this post.
    Programming Programming ← Starting over, and continuing. [...]

6.  [Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice | The
    Personal Blog of Artem Koval,
    M.Sc.](http://artemkoval.com/2011/10/29/don%e2%80%99t-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - October 29, 2011

    [...] Incredibly satisfying reading. I’m relatively new to software
    industry but I can back at least 80% of article’s statements.
    Software Engineering Wisdom TwitterDiggFacebookDeliciousStumbleUpon
    [...]

7.  [Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice « that
    dismal
    science](http://dismalsci.wordpress.com/2011/10/29/don%e2%80%99t-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - October 29, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice Like
    this:LikeBe the first to like this post. [...]

8.  [| Magic Blue Smoke](http://www.aaronmbrown.net/blog/2011/10/355/) -
    October 29, 2011

    [...] This article is a much-needed dose of truth and sound advice
    in an area (the professional side of being an engineering
    professional) that gets drastically ignored in most of our
    educations. The author’s observations match mine fairly well, and
    about the only thing I would add is a shorthand that I’ve myself had
    to learn in the past few years: [...]

9.  [Go to Code with the Language You Know, Not the Language You
    “Should” Know | Magic Blue
    Smoke](http://www.aaronmbrown.net/blog/2011/10/go-to-code-with-the-language-you-know-not-the-language-you-should-know/)
    - October 29, 2011

    [...] This article is a much-needed dose of truth and sound advice
    in an area (the professional side of being an engineering
    professional) that gets drastically ignored in most of our
    educations. The author’s observations match mine fairly well, and
    about the only thing I would add is a shorthand that I’ve myself had
    to learn in the past few years: [...]

10. [I gave myself a job interview using FizzBuzz… « Earth Via
    Radio](http://earthviaradio.wordpress.com/2011/10/30/i-gave-myself-a-job-interview-using-fizzbuzz/)
    - October 29, 2011

    [...] top story on HackerNews last night was a blog post by Patrick
    McKenzie called Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career
    Advice. Buried inside the article was a reference to another blog
    post by Jeff Atwood, lamenting the poor [...]

11. [Job Searching «
    Strikee](http://strikee.wordpress.com/2011/10/30/job-searching/) -
    October 29, 2011

    [...] in this blog post (Patrick is really smart) the job creation
    process is summarised amazingly in one line “Read [...]

12. [Realities Of Your Industry 101 |
    JoelsBlog.net](http://www.joelsblog.net/realities-of-your-industry-101/)
    - October 30, 2011

    [...] 101 Sunday, October 30th, 2011 | JFI1, Marketing Don’t Call
    Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice. It's like recess
    without all the dangerous playground [...]

13. [Links 30/10/2011: GNOME 3.3.1, GNOME User Survey |
    Techrights](http://techrights.org/2011/10/30/gnome-user-survey/) -
    October 30, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice
    Engineers are hired to create business value, not to program things:
    Businesses do things for irrational and political reasons all the
    time (see below), but in the main they converge on doing things
    which increase revenue or reduce costs. Status in well-run
    businesses generally is awarded to people who successfully take
    credit for doing one of these things. (That can, but does not
    necessarily, entail actually doing them.) The person who has decided
    to bring on one more engineer is not doing it because they love
    having a geek around the room, they are doing it because adding the
    geek allows them to complete a project (or projects) which will add
    revenue or decrease costs. Producing beautiful software is not a
    goal. Solving complex technical problems is not a goal. Writing
    bug-free code is not a goal. Using sexy programming languages is not
    a goal. Add revenue. Reduce costs. Those are your only goals. [...]

14. [People are no Longer Necessary, or Even Desirable « The Compulsive
    Explainer](http://halsmith.wordpress.com/2011/10/30/people-are-no-longer-necessary-or-even-desirable/)
    - October 30, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer [...]

15. [Do LOB Applications Require Good
    Usability?](http://uxventure.com/2011/10/do-lob-applications-require-good-usability/)
    - October 30, 2011

    [...] a bit of tongue-in-cheek commentary, Patrick McKenzie talks
    about the real world of software development. I found it to be a
    fairly [...]

16. [ReShare : Brogramming, Interviewing, and Science Fair |
    amy.codes](http://amycodes.wordpress.com/2011/10/30/reshare-brogramming-interviewing-and-science-fair/)
    - October 30, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice I
    heard this only one other time when I was in college and it never
    made sense to me. I code, and I like to code. Now I know it means
    more than that. It’s not just programming, it’s also product design,
    time management, and communication. You can code something or build
    it. If you choose the latter, you’re an engineer. [...]

17. [Guide me!!!!!!soft engineers
    plz](http://www.defence.pk/forums/members-club/137792-guide-me-soft-engineers-plz.html#post2239829)
    - October 30, 2011

    [...] planning for H1B visa too after 1 year.So guide me yaaro…
    Original Post By Prism Read =\> Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer,
    And Other Career Advice | Kalzumeus Software Reply With Quote +
    Reply to Thread « Video Gamers report [...]

18. [Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer | A+ Computer Science
    Blog](http://www.apluscompsci.com/blog/?p=749) - October 30, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer Sunday, October 30th, 2011 |
    Uncategorized
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    [...]

19. [Hackers and Dreamers | Sealed
    Abstract](http://sealedabstract.com/code/hackers-and-dreamers/) -
    October 31, 2011

    [...] been a lot of talk lately about what it means to be a
    programmer. Patio11 has a fantastic article about not being “just’ a
    programmer–about selling yourself as someone who creates [...]

20. [Not a programmer! – Brett Hutley's
    Blog](http://bretthutley.com/2011/10/31/not-a-programmer/) - October
    31, 2011

    [...] read the post "Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other
    Career Advice" on the weekend. It is mostly aimed at permanent
    employees at companies, although I thought there [...]

21. [Usability Counts | Blog Archive | Kalzumeus: Don’t Call Yourself A
    Programmer, And Other Career
    Advice](http://www.usabilitycounts.com/2011/10/31/kalzumeus-don%e2%80%99t-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - October 31, 2011

    [...] This article is great career advice. Even though it’s written
    for programmers, it’s really for everyone who has a job. “Read ad.
    Send in resume. Go to job interview. Receive offer.” is the
    exception, not the typical case, for getting employment: Most jobs
    are never available publicly, just like most worthwhile candidates
    are not available publicly (see here). Information about the
    position travels at approximately the speed of beer, sometimes
    lubricated by email. The decisionmaker at a company knows he needs
    someone. He tells his friends and business contacts. One of them
    knows someone — family, a roommate from college, someone they met at
    a conference, an ex-colleague, whatever. Introductions are made, a
    meeting happens, and they achieve agreement in principle on the job
    offer. Then the resume/HR department/formal offer dance comes about.
    [...]

22. [不要自称为程序员 - 博客 - 伯乐在线](http://blog.jobbole.com/4291/)
    - October 31, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

23. [不要自称为程序员 « My Farmland |
    净土](http://chloe2111.wordpress.com/2011/11/01/%e4%b8%8d%e8%a6%81%e8%87%aa%e7%a7%b0%e4%b8%ba%e7%a8%8b%e5%ba%8f%e5%91%98/)
    - October 31, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

24. [阮一峰:不要自称为程序员 | 西西笔记](http://www.591wen.com/?p=85) -
    October 31, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

25. [异锐工作室 »
    不要自称为程序员](http://www.e-keen.com/2011/11/01/246/) - October
    31, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

26. [不要自称为程序员 | Taylor[后端技术]
    |PHP工程师|业余运维](http://www.pztai.com/index.php/archives/48) -
    November 1, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

27. [I am a programmer | jacquesmattheij.com | Clean
    Code](http://www.kevinsookocheff.com/2011/11/01/i-am-a-programmer-jacquesmattheij-com/)
    - November 1, 2011

    [...] Jacques Mattheij has written a great counterpoint to Patrick
    McKenzie’s article Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer. [...]

28. [what is programming? — coder .
    cl](http://coder.cl/2011/11/what-is-programming/) - November 1, 2011

    [...] to framework application and usage. There is a nice article
    describing the fact that I meant: Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer,
    And Other Career Advice. So probably you are not really programming
    in your current job position. On a private mailing list [...]

29. [Ruby is the Force. Rails is the Dark Side. |
    Wondible](http://wondible.com/2011/11/01/ruby-is-the-force-rails-is-the-dark-side/)
    - November 1, 2011

    [...] the tools. And if you do understand the tools? Be careful
    playing with the dark side. If you shouldn’t call yourself a
    programmer, calling yourself a Rails programmer means your destiny
    has been [...]

30. [Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice | Brent
    Sordyl's
    blog](http://sordyl.info/2011/11/01/don%e2%80%99t-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - November 1, 2011

    [...] Story: Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career
    Advice) GA\_googleAddAttr("AdOpt", "1"); GA\_googleAddAttr("Origin",
    "other"); [...]

31. [Nice to meet you, I´m an Automation Business Logic Specialist -
    Programacion de Juegos](http://www.micronosis.com/?p=1616) -
    November 2, 2011

    [...] Rara vez hago una simple página web. Pero la médula de lo que
    hago es programar. Sin embargo, estas recomendaciones profesionales,
    donde nos advierten que promocionarte como programador es colocar
    una fecha a tu despido me [...]

32. [不要自称为程序员 | 幻灭月空](http://i.zicii.com/2011/11/1591/) -
    November 3, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

33. [Don’t call yourself a programmer …
    README.txt](http://augustmalson.com/blog/2011/11/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer-readme-txt/)
    - November 3, 2011

    [...]
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    [...]

34. [What Do You Know Now That You Wish You Knew When You Started Your
    Career? [Ask The Readers] « Go Digital
    Apps](http://www.godigitalapps.com/what-do-you-know-now-that-you-wish-you-knew-when-you-started-your-career-ask-the-readers/)
    - November 3, 2011

    [...] McKenzie recently wrote this awesome post (he calls it a
    README.txt for your career) on what he learned after ten years “and
    a lot of [...]

35. [What Do You Know Now That You Wish You Knew When You Started Your
    Career? [Ask The Readers]](http://nuhrd.com/wpnuhrd/?p=2308) -
    November 3, 2011

    [...] McKenzie recently wrote this awesome post (he calls it a
    README.txt for your career) on what he learned after ten years “and
    a lot of [...]

36. [Read this | Cameron
    Macintosh](http://natureboy153.wordpress.com/2011/11/03/read-this/)
    - November 3, 2011

    [...] other day, I stumbled across this blog post on twitter: “Don’t
    Call Yourself a Programmer“. It starts with the following: If there
    was one course I could add to every engineering [...]

37. [不要自称为程序员 | Eleye.org
    关注电子研发相关的新闻与技术](http://www.eleye.org/post/72.html) -
    November 3, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

38. [Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice | A Blog
    with No
    Name](http://www.ablogwithnoname.com/2011/11/don%e2%80%99t-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - November 4, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice |
    Kalzumeus Software. [...]

39. [Noticeable Hacker news I read(2011/09-2011/10) | David Euler on
    coding and
    design](http://www.beyondlinux.com/blog/2011/11/05/noticeable-hacker-news-i-read201109-201110/)
    - November 5, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice |
    Kalzumeus Software [...]

40. [Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer and other Career Advice « You Got
    to be Kidding's
    Blog](http://yougottobekidding.wordpress.com/2011/11/06/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - November 6, 2011

    [...]
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    GA\_googleAddAttr("AdOpt", "1"); GA\_googleAddAttr("Origin",
    "other"); GA\_googleAddAttr("theme\_bg", "161410");
    GA\_googleAddAttr("theme\_text", "999999");
    GA\_googleAddAttr("theme\_link", "d8d7d3");
    GA\_googleAddAttr("theme\_border", "35302A");
    GA\_googleAddAttr("theme\_url", "BD934F");
    GA\_googleAddAttr("LangId", "1"); GA\_googleAddAttr("Tag", "life");
    GA\_googleFillSlot("wpcom\_sharethrough"); Share
    this:EmailPrintDiggFacebookRedditStumbleUponTwitterLike this:LikeBe
    the first to like this post. [...]

41. [Getting your first “real” job: 0 – Introduction | Seconds &
    pixels](http://www.anothem.net/archives/2011/11/06/getting-your-first-real-job-0-introduction/)
    - November 6, 2011

    [...] start you off, if you are or were a CS student, you need to
    read this article. [...]

42. [Linkdump: 6/11/2011 « nTh among
    all](http://kyl191.net/2011/11/linkdump-6112011/) - November 6, 2011

    [...]
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    – Like many job/career articles I’ve read, makes me alternately feel
    hyped up and depressed about future job prospects. [...]

43. [Почему рабочих рынков для программистов на самом деле два |
    александр.moskalyuk.name](http://moskalyuk.name/3890) - November 6,
    2011

    [...] Не называйте себя программистами – уговаривает коллег Патрик
    МакКензи, рисуя следующую картину для молодых программистов,
    помышляющих о работе внутри компаний. Внутри любой компании,
    пользуясь методикой гуру науки менеджмента Питера Дрюкера, есть
    центры зарабатывающие и центры тратящие. Люди, которые управляют
    зарабтывающими центрами, обычно не медлят с увеличением зарплат,
    присуждением бонусов и другим увеличением компенсации, так как хотят
    удержать тех, кто создает business value. Люди, которые поставлены
    во главу центра растрат, всегда будут стараться оптимизировать
    расходы, в том числе и за счет финансовых пакетов своих подчиненных:
    The person who has decided to bring on one more engineer is not
    doing it because they love having a geek around the room, they are
    doing it because adding the geek allows them to complete a project
    (or projects) which will add revenue or decrease costs. Producing
    beautiful software is not a goal. Solving complex technical problems
    is not a goal. Writing bug-free code is not a goal. Using sexy
    programming languages is not a goal. Add revenue. Reduce costs.
    Those are your only goals. [...]

44. [不要自称为程序员 » Ivy's
    note](http://ivy7.me/2011/11/08/%e4%b8%8d%e8%a6%81%e8%87%aa%e7%a7%b0%e4%b8%ba%e7%a8%8b%e5%ba%8f%e5%91%98/)
    - November 8, 2011

    [...] 每年都有无数年轻程序员，加入软件行业。
    他们在学校里学过编程，但是对这个行业的现实一无所知。 Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    ================================== [...]

45. [Don’t call yourself a programmer « Stuff From
    Hsoi](http://blog.hsoi.com/2011/11/08/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    - November 8, 2011

    [...] great article, “Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer, and Other
    Career Advice“. It’s long. I’ve only been able to skim it. But it’s
    chock full of [...]

46. [Suggested Reading |
    AllInGeek.com](http://www.allingeek.com/suggested-reading/) -
    November 8, 2011

    [...] “Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer” Patrick McKenzie writes to
    politely thrust unsuspecting college aged “Computer [...]

47. [Don’t call yourself redundant « Cartesian
    Faith](http://cartesianfaith.wordpress.com/2011/11/08/dont-call-yourself-redundant/)
    - November 8, 2011

    [...] article telling programmers not to call themselves programmers
    has been making the rounds recently. The author explains:
    “Programmer” sounds like [...]

48. [不要自称为程序员，你不是真正的程序员 |
    恋香缘](http://lxy.me/do-not-claim-to-be-programmers-you-are-not-real-programmers.html)
    - November 11, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

49. [Today’s Shared Links for November 12, 2011 @ Chuqui
    3.0](http://www.chuqui.com/2011/11/todays-shared-links-for-november-12-2011/)
    - November 12, 2011

    [...] → Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice
    [...]

50. [不要自称为程序员 | 岭南六少 -
    一朵在LAMP架构下挣扎的云](http://blog.chedushi.com/archives/977) -
    November 12, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

51. [Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice |
    phatbits](http://phatbits.com/2011/11/13/don%e2%80%99t-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - November 13, 2011

    [...] McKenzie writes: Don’t call yourself a programmer:
    “Programmer” sounds like “anomalously high-cost peon who [...]

52. [Career Advice | Pragmatic
    Life](http://seenaah.wordpress.com/2011/11/13/career-advice/) -
    November 13, 2011

    [...] I read the article “Don’t call yourself a Programmer” Although
    it is somehow harsh and I don’t agree with some parts of it, I still
    think it is a [...]

53. [jake.marttinen » Blog Archive » Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer,
    and Other Career
    Advice](http://blog.marttinen.ca/2011/11/don%e2%80%99t-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice/)
    - November 14, 2011

    [...]
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    [...]

54. [There Ain’t No Stack of
    Resumes](http://daveheal.com/advice/there-aint-no-stack-of-resumes/)
    - November 14, 2011

    [...] finish with an extended quote from a great post that you
    should read the entirety of called “Don’t Call Yourself A
    Programmer.” The post aims to “be the README.txt for your young
    career as an engineer” but [...]

55. [Bookmarks for November 16th –
    LostFocus](http://www.lostfocus.de/archives/2011/11/16/bookmarks-for-november-16th/)
    - November 16, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice |
    Kalzumeus Software [...]

56. [Great information- dont-call-yourself-a-programmer by Kalzumeus.com
    « Wisdom of Sathish
    Jayapal](http://sathishjayapal.com/2011/11/16/great-information-dont-call-yourself-a-programmer-by-kalzumeus-com/)
    - November 16, 2011

    [...]
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    Like this:LikeBe the first to like this post. [...]

57. [Dear Chronic Daters, « Beyond the Face of facebook
    .](http://beyondthefaceoffacebook.wordpress.com/2011/11/17/dear-chronic-daters/)
    - November 17, 2011

    [...] Indeed, the sound of the shattering glass is a call to “quit
    with the self-indulgent ass-sitting, and let’s get to the purpose of
    life – the work of repair and building!”:) Actually, you already
    have this capacity: you repair and build everyday – at your job –
    but just for the fleeting, sole purpose of keeping someone else’s
    and your pockets lined with the green stuff (see
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)).
    [...]

58. [Are you an engineer or a programmer? « Cartesian
    Faith](http://cartesianfaith.wordpress.com/2011/11/17/are-you-an-engineer-or-a-programmer/)
    - November 17, 2011

    [...] post is a follow up on a previous post regarding “Don’t call
    yourself a programmer” as well as a response to “The hustler’s
    manifesto“. These articles attempt [...]

59. [Hey, Hipster – “Ninja” Isn’t Cool: What Developers Really Want to
    Be Called Is… | Gayle Laakmann McDowell | Technology
    Woman](http://www.technologywoman.com/2011/11/18/hey-hipster-ninja-isnt-cool-what-developers-really-want-to-be-called-is/)
    - November 17, 2011

    [...] like code monkey. Developers are advised not to call
    themselves programmers, and you shouldn’t call them that [...]

60. [不要自称为程序员 | 够戏博客](http://blog.506c.com/1884.html) -
    November 18, 2011

    [...] Patrick
    McKenzie是美国一家小软件公司的老板，他写了一篇长文，介绍这个行业的一些实际情况。我看了以后很感慨，有些地方很受启发。我选择了一部分，翻译如下。
    [...]

61. [Continuous Education « IgorShare
    Weblog](http://igorshare.wordpress.com/2011/11/17/continuous-education/)
    - November 18, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice |
    Kalzumeus Softw [...]

62. [The Random Thread - TAPATALK EDITION - Page
    57](http://forum.notebookreview.com/off-topic/623299-random-thread-tapatalk-edition-57.html#post8089849)
    - November 20, 2011

    [...] The Random Thread – TAPATALK EDITION Don’t Call Yourself A
    Programmer, And Other Career Advice | Kalzumeus Software This is one
    of the most important things I have ever or could ever link someone
    to. Read it all, [...]

63. [SAP BusinessObjects Resume
    Tips](http://www.dallasmarks.org/blog/2011/11/sap-businessobjects-resume-tips/)
    - November 23, 2011

    [...] But some of you can. And should. Check out this helpful blog
    post by Patrick McKenzie, Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, for
    [...]

64. [Must read article for any Developer/Programmer or whatever you call
    yourself | NixData](http://www.nixdata.com/blog/?p=78) - November
    24, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice
    [...]

65. [Talk 149: tote Schafe und verrückte Verhandlungsziegen | RadioTux
    GNU/Linux](http://blog.radiotux.de/2011/11/25/talk-149-tote-schafe-und-verruckte-verhandlungsziegen/)
    - November 25, 2011

    [...] Don’t call yourself a programmer (pfleidi) [...]

66. [Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice |
    Kalzumeus Software « inphamous
    development](http://inphamousdevelopment.wordpress.com/2011/11/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career-advice-kalzumeus-software/)
    - November 28, 2011

    [...]
    [http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)
    [...]

67. [The Blogs and Podcasts that I Currently Subscribe To (and
    Why)](http://www.tropicalmba.com/the-blogs-and-podcasts-that-i-currently-subscribe-to-and-why/)
    - December 7, 2011

    [...] READ: “Don’t Call Yourself a Programmer, and Other Career
    Advice” [...]

68. [Chimpanzees « SL](http://stanleylio.com/2011/11/16/chimpanzees/) -
    December 7, 2011

    [...] East or West, now or then, middle school teenage kids or
    “mature” university students: decision-making positions are always
    occupied by the [...]

69. [Young Engineers: README.txt « Steven Trevino
    Blog](http://www.steventrevino.net/2011/11/03/young-engineers-readme-txt/)
    - December 8, 2011

    [...] Recently ran across this article geared towards young
    engineers. The title, as well as the article, gives advice: “Don’t
    call yourself a programmer“. [...]

70. [Trevor Turk — Links for
    12-9-2011](http://trevorturk.com/2011/12/09/links-for-12-9-2011/) -
    December 9, 2011

    [...] Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice |
    Kalzumeus Software [...]

71. [At the end of the day, your life happiness will not be dominated by
    your career. Either talk to older people or trust the social
    scientists who have: family, faith, hobbies, etc etc generally swamp
    career achievements and money in terms of things which
    ac](http://khurt.com/blog/2011/12/17/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer-and-other-career/)
    - December 17, 2011

    [...] → Don’t Call Yourself A Programmer, And Other Career Advice
    Share this:ShareStumbleUponDiggPrintEmailFacebookReddit
    WebFontConfig = { typekit: { id: 'cpw0qzg' } }; (function() { var wf
    = document.createElement('script'); wf.src = ('https:' ==
    document.location.protocol ? 'https' : 'http') +
    '://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/webfont/1/webfont.js'; wf.type =
    'text/javascript'; wf.async = 'true'; var s =
    document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0];
    s.parentNode.insertBefore(wf, s); })(); {lang: "en-US"} /\* \*/
    WebFontConfig = { typekit: { id: 'cpw0qzg' } }; (function() { var wf
    = document.createElement('script'); wf.src = ('https:' ==
    document.location.protocol ? 'https' : 'http') +
    '://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/webfont/1/webfont.js'; wf.type =
    'text/javascript'; wf.async = 'true'; var s =
    document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0];
    s.parentNode.insertBefore(wf, s); })(); {lang: "en-US"} Send to
    Email Address [...]

72. [Anonymous](http://www.thinkdigit.com/forum/programming/150813-don-t-call-yourself-programmer-other-career-advice.html#post1554458)
    - January 2, 2012

    [...] [...]

73. [Dont Call Yourself Programmer | Development
    Notes](http://taylanisikdemir.wordpress.com/2011/10/29/dont-call-yourself-programmer/)
    - January 15, 2012

    [...] Click to read. Share
    this:ShareEmailFacebookTwitterLinkedInStumbleUponLike this:LikeBe
    the first to like this post. [...]

### Interested In Selling More Software?

[Get a free 45 minute video](https://training.kalzumeus.com) by me on
improving the first-run experience of your software, absolutely free.
Two people have told me that implementing some of the advice from it
achieved measurable increases in their sales.

### For Further Reading

Interested in more articles like this? I suggest this [curated
collection](http://www.kalzumeus.com/greatest-hits) of the best work
from this blog.

### Recent Posts

-   [Harry Potter And The Cryptocurrency of
    Stars](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/08/05/harry-potter-and-the-cryptocurrency-of-stars/)
-   [Kalzumeus Podcast Episode 8: High Touch Software Sales with Steli
    Efti](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/07/24/kalzumeus-podcast-episode-8-high-touch-software-sales-with-steli-efti/)
-   [Kalzumeus Podcast Episode 7: Launching New
    Products](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/06/19/kalzumeus-podcast-episode-7-launching-new-products/)
-   [Conversion Optimization in Practice: Baconbiz 2013
    Presentation](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/05/12/conversion-optimization-in-practice-baconbiz-2013-presentation/)
-   [What Heartbleed Can Teach The OSS Community About
    Marketing](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/04/09/what-heartbleed-can-teach-the-oss-community-about-marketing/)

### Recent Comments

-   Qq on [Harry Potter And The Cryptocurrency of
    Stars](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/08/05/harry-potter-and-the-cryptocurrency-of-stars/#comment-15767)
-   [Vspike](http://coinshovel.com) on [Harry Potter And The
    Cryptocurrency of
    Stars](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/08/05/harry-potter-and-the-cryptocurrency-of-stars/#comment-15714)
-   Steve on [Harry Potter And The Cryptocurrency of
    Stars](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/08/05/harry-potter-and-the-cryptocurrency-of-stars/#comment-15712)
-   Raahul on [Harry Potter And The Cryptocurrency of
    Stars](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/08/05/harry-potter-and-the-cryptocurrency-of-stars/#comment-15707)
-   grinnbearit on [Harry Potter And The Cryptocurrency of
    Stars](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2014/08/05/harry-potter-and-the-cryptocurrency-of-stars/#comment-15705)

### Search This Blog

Kalzumeus Software © 2014. All Rights Reserved.

Powered by [WordPress](http://www.wordpress.org). Designed by [![Woo
Themes](http://www.kalzumeus.com/wp-content/themes/biznizz/images/woothemes.png)](http://www.woothemes.com)

Thank you! Please check your inbox.

*Loading...*

Free video + email advice on making & selling software:

(1\~2 emails a week.)

[![image](http://www.kalzumeus.com/wp-content/plugins/viperbar/images/icon-up.png)](javascript:void(0);)

[![image](http://www.kalzumeus.com/wp-content/plugins/viperbar/images/icon-down.png)](javascript:void(0);)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/?HN_20140807
