[Mathias Bynens](/)
===================

Navigation
==========

-   [Home](/)
-   [Archive](/notes)

[← Processing Content Security Policy violation
reports](/notes/csp-reports)

JavaScript has a Unicode problem
================================

Published 20th October 2013 · tagged with
[JavaScript](/notes#javascript), [Unicode](/notes#unicode)

The way JavaScript handles Unicode is… surprising, to say the least.
This write-up explains the pain points associated with Unicode in
JavaScript, provides solutions for common problems, and explains how the
upcoming ECMAScript 6 will improve the situation.

**Note:** It sucks to have to say this, but this document is best viewed
in a browser that is capable of rendering emoji, like Firefox, Safari,
or Internet Explorer. [Blink (Chrome/Opera) on OS X doesn’t render these
glyphs at
all](https://code.google.com/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=62435), which
makes some of the code examples on this page pretty hard to make sense
of. You’ve been warned!

Unicode basics
--------------

Before we take a closer look at JavaScript, let’s make sure we’re all on
the same page when it comes to Unicode.

It’s easiest to think of Unicode as a database that maps any symbol you
can think of to a number called its **code point**, and to a unique
name. That way, it’s easy to refer to specific symbols without actually
using the symbol itself. Examples:

-   `A` is [U+0041 LATIN CAPITAL LETTER
    A](http://codepoints.net/U+0041).
-   `a` is [U+0061 LATIN SMALL LETTER A](http://codepoints.net/U+0061).
-   `©` is [U+00A9 COPYRIGHT SIGN](http://codepoints.net/U+00A9).
-   `☃` is [U+2603 SNOWMAN](http://codepoints.net/U+2603).
-   `💩` is [U+1F4A9 PILE OF POO](http://codepoints.net/U+1F4A9).

Code points are usually formatted as hexadecimal numbers, zero-padded up
to at least four digits, with a U+ prefix.

The possible code point values range from U+0000 to U+10FFFF. That’s
over 1.1 million possible symbols. To keep things organised, Unicode
divides this range of code points into 17 planes that consist of about
65 thousand code points each.

The first plane is called the **Basic Multilingual Plane or BMP**, and
it’s probably the most important one, as it contains all the most
commonly used symbols. Most of the time you don’t need any code points
outside of the BMP for text documents in English. Just like any other
Unicode plane, it groups about 65 thousand symbols.

That leaves us about 1 million other code points that live outside the
BMP. The planes these code points belong to are called **supplementary
planes**, or **astral planes**.

**Astral code points** are pretty easy to recognize: if you need more
than 4 hexadecimal digits to represent the code point, it’s an astral
code point.

Now that we have a basic understanding of Unicode, let’s see how it
applies to JavaScript strings.

Escape sequences
----------------

You may have seen [things like
this](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-escapes) before:

    >> '\x41\x42\x43''ABC'>> '\x61\x62\x63''abc'

These are called [hexadecimal escape
sequences](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-escapes#hexadecimal).
They consist of two hexadecimal digits that refer to the matching code
point. For example, `\x41` represents [U+0041 LATIN CAPITAL LETTER
A](http://codepoints.net/U+0041). These escape sequences can be used for
code points in the range from U+0000 to U+00FF.

Also common is the following type of escape:

    >> '\u0041\u0042\u0043''ABC'>> 'I \u2661 JavaScript!''I ♡ JavaScript!'

These are called [Unicode escape
sequences](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-escapes#unicode).
They consist of exactly 4 hexadecimal digits that represent a code
point. For example, `\u2661` represents [U+2661 WHITE HEART
SUIT](http://codepoints.net/U+2661). These escape sequences can be used
for code points in the range from U+0000 to U+FFFF, i.e. the entire
Basic Multilingual Plane.

But what about all the other planes — the astral planes? We need more
than 4 hexadecimal digits to represent their code points… So how can we
escape them?

In ECMAScript 6 this will be easy, since it introduces a new type of
escape sequence: [Unicode code point
escapes](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-escapes#unicode-code-point).
For example:

    >> '\u{41}\u{42}\u{43}''ABC'>> '\u{1F4A9}''💩' // U+1F4A9 PILE OF POO

Between the braces you can use up to six hexadecimal digits, which is
enough to represent all Unicode code points. So, by using this type of
escape sequence, you can easily escape any Unicode symbol based on its
code point.

For backwards compatibility with ECMAScript 5 and older environments,
the unfortunate solution is to use surrogate pairs:

    >> '\uD83D\uDCA9''💩' // U+1F4A9 PILE OF POO

In that case, each escape represents the code point of a surrogate half.
Two surrogate halves form a single astral symbol.

Note that the surrogate code points don’t look anything like the
original code point. [There are
formulas](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-encoding#surrogate-formulae)
to calculate the surrogates based on a given astral code point, and the
other way around — to calculate the original astral code point based on
its surrogate pair.

Using surrogate pairs, all astral code points (i.e. from U+010000 to
U+10FFFF) can be represented… But the whole concept of using a single
escape to represent BMP symbols, and two escapes for astral symbols, is
confusing, and has lots of annoying consequences.

Counting symbols in a JavaScript string
---------------------------------------

Let’s say you want to count the number of symbols in a given string, for
example. How would you go about it?

My first thought would probably be to simply use the `length` property.

    >> 'A'.length // U+0041 LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A1>> 'A' == '\u0041'true>> 'B'.length // U+0042 LATIN CAPITAL LETTER B1>> 'B' == '\u0042'true

In these examples, the `length` property of the string happens to
reflect the number of characters. This makes sense: if we use escape
sequences to represent the symbols, it’s obvious that we only need a
single escape for each of these symbols. But this is not always the
case! Here’s a slightly different example:

    >> '𝐀'.length // U+1D400 MATHEMATICAL BOLD CAPITAL A2>> '𝐀' == '\uD835\uDC00'true>> '𝐁'.length // U+1D401 MATHEMATICAL BOLD CAPITAL B2>> '𝐁' == '\uD835\uDC01'true>> '💩'.length // U+1F4A9 PILE OF POO2>> '💩' == '\uD83D\uDCA9'true

Internally, JavaScript represents astral symbols as [surrogate
pairs](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-encoding#surrogate-pairs),
and [it exposes the separate surrogate halves as separate
“characters”](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-encoding "JavaScript’s internal character encoding: UCS-2 or UTF-16?").
If you represent the symbols using nothing but ECMAScript 5-compatible
escape sequences, you’ll see that two escapes are needed for each astral
symbol. This is confusing, because humans generally think in terms of
*Unicode symbols* or *graphemes* instead.

### Accounting for astral symbols

Getting back to the question: how to accurately count the number of
symbols in a JavaScript string? The trick is to account for surrogate
pairs properly, and only count each pair as a single symbol. You could
use something like this:

    var regexAstralSymbols = /[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]/g;function countSymbols(string) {  return string    // replace every surrogate pair with a BMP symbol    .replace(regexAstralSymbols, '_')    // then get the length    .length;}

Or, if you use [Punycode.js](http://mths.be/punycode) (which ships with
[Node.js](http://nodejs.org/)), make use of its utility methods to
convert between JavaScript strings and Unicode code points. The
`punycode.ucs2.decode` method takes a string and returns an array of
Unicode code points; one item for each symbol.

    function countSymbols(string) {  return punycode.ucs2.decode(string).length;}

Using either implementation, we’re now able to count code points
properly, which leads to more accurate results:

    >> countSymbols('A') // U+0041 LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A1>> countSymbols('𝐀') // U+1D400 MATHEMATICAL BOLD CAPITAL A1>> countSymbols('💩') // U+1F4A9 PILE OF POO1

### Accounting for lookalikes

But if we’re being really pedantic, counting the number of symbols in a
string is even more complicated. Consider this example:

    >> 'mañana' == 'mañana'false

JavaScript is telling us that these strings are different, but visually,
there’s no way to tell! So what’s going on there?

[![image](/_img/js-escapes-manana.png)](http://mothereff.in/js-escapes#1ma%C3%B1ana%20man%CC%83ana)

As [my JavaScript escapes
tool](http://mothereff.in/js-escapes#1ma%C3%B1ana%20man%CC%83ana) would
tell you, the reason is the following:

    >> 'ma\xF1ana' == 'man\u0303ana'false>> 'ma\xF1ana'.length6>> 'man\u0303ana'.length7

The first string contains [U+00F1 LATIN SMALL LETTER N WITH
TILDE](http://codepoints.net/U+00F1), while the second string uses two
separate code points ([U+006E LATIN SMALL LETTER
N](http://codepoints.net/U+006E) and [U+0303 COMBINING
TILDE](http://codepoints.net/U+0303)) to create the same glyph. That
explains why they’re not equal, and why they have a different `length`.

However, if we want to count the number of symbols in these strings the
same way a human being would, we’d expect the answer `6` for both
strings, since that’s the number of visually distinguishable glyphs in
each string. How can we make this happen?

In ECMAScript 6, the solution is fairly simple:

    function countSymbolsPedantically(string) {  // Unicode Normalization, NFC form, to account for lookalikes:  var normalized = string.normalize('NFC');  // Account for astral symbols / surrogates, just like we did before:  return punycode.ucs2.decode(normalized).length;}

The `normalize` method on `String.prototype` performs [Unicode
normalization](http://unicode.org/reports/tr15/), which accounts for
these differences. If there is a single code point that represents the
same glyph as another code point followed by a combining mark, it will
normalize it to the single code point form.

    >> countSymbolsPedantically('mañana') // U+00F16>> countSymbolsPedantically('mañana') // U+006E + U+03036

For backwards compatibility with ECMAScript 5 and older environments, [a
`String.prototype.normalize` polyfill](http://git.io/unorm) can be used.

### Accounting for other combining marks

This still isn’t perfect, though — code points with multiple combining
marks applied to them always result in a single visual glyph, but may
not have a normalized form, in which case normalization doesn’t help.
For example:

    >> 'q\u0307\u0323'.normalize('NFC') // `q̣̇`'q\u0307\u0323'>> countSymbolsPedantically('q\u0307\u0323')3 // not 1>> countSymbolsPedantically('Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞')74 // not 6

You could use [a regular
expression](https://github.com/mathiasbynens/esrever/blob/c32979673931a05b594d0a82ed821a59102faaba/esrever.js#L20)
to remove any combining marks from the input string instead if a more
accurate solution is needed.

    // Regex generated by this script: https://github.com/mathiasbynens/esrever/blob/master/scripts/export-data.jsvar regexSymbolWithCombiningMarks = /([\0-\u02FF\u0370-\u1DBF\u1E00-\u20CF\u2100-\uD7FF\uDC00-\uFE1F\uFE30-\uFFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF])([\u0300-\u036F\u1DC0-\u1DFF\u20D0-\u20FF\uFE20-\uFE2F]+)/g;function countSymbolsIgnoringCombiningMarks(string) {  // Remove any combining marks, leaving only the symbols they belong to:  var stripped = string.replace(regexSymbolWithCombiningMarks, function($0, symbol, combiningMarks) {    return symbol;  });  // Account for astral symbols / surrogates, just like we did before:  return punycode.ucs2.decode(stripped).length;}

This function removes any combining marks, leaving only the symbols they
belong to. Any unmatched combining marks (at the start of the string)
are left intact. This solution works even in ECMAScript 3 environments,
and it provides the most accurate results yet:

    >> countSymbolsIgnoringCombiningMarks('q\u0307\u0323')1>> countSymbolsIgnoringCombiningMarks('Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞')6

Reversing strings in JavaScript
-------------------------------

Here’s an example of a similar problem: reversing a string in
JavaScript. How hard can it be, right? A common, very simple, solution
to this problem is the following:

    // naive solutionfunction reverse(string) {  return string.split('').reverse().join('');}

It seems to work fine in a lot of cases:

    >> reverse('abc')'cba'>> reverse('mañana') // U+00F1'anañam'

However, it completely messes up strings that contain combining marks or
astral symbols.

    >> reverse('mañana') // U+006E + U+0303'anãnam' // note: the `~` is now applied to the `a` instead of the `n`>> reverse('💩') // U+1F4A9'��' // `'\uDCA9\uD83D'`, the surrogate pair for `💩` in the wrong order

Luckily, a brilliant computer scientist named Missy Elliot came up with
a [bulletproof
algorithm](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UODX_pYpVxk&t=33s) that
accounts for these issues. It goes:

> I put my thang down, flip it, and reverse it. I put my thang down,
> flip it, and reverse it.

And indeed: by swapping the position of any combining marks with the
symbol they belong to, as well as reversing any surrogate pairs before
further processing the string, [the issues are avoided
successfully](http://mths.be/esrever). Thanks, Missy!

    // using Esrever (http://mths.be/esrever)>> esrever.reverse('mañana') // U+006E + U+0303'anañam'>> esrever.reverse('💩') // U+1F4A9'💩' // U+1F4A9

Issues with Unicode in string methods
-------------------------------------

This behavior affects other string methods, too.

### Turning a code point into a symbol

`String.fromCharCode` allows you to create a string based on a Unicode
code point. But it only works correctly for code points in the BMP range
(i.e. from U+0000 to U+FFFF). If you use it with an astral code point,
you’ll get an unexpected result.

    >> String.fromCharCode(0x0041) // U+0041'A' // U+0041>> String.fromCharCode(0x1F4A9) // U+1F4A9'' // U+F4A9, not U+1F4A9

The only workaround is to [calculate the code points for the surrogate
halves
yourself](http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-encoding#surrogate-formulae),
and pass them as separate arguments.

    >> String.fromCharCode(0xD83D, 0xDCA9)'💩' // U+1F4A9

If you don’t want to go through the trouble of calculating the surrogate
halves, you could resort to [Punycode.js](http://mths.be/punycode)’s
utility methods once again:

    >> punycode.ucs2.encode([ 0x1F4A9 ])'💩' // U+1F4A9

Luckily, ECMAScript 6 introduces `String.fromCodePoint(codePoint)` which
does handle astral symbols correctly. It can be used for any Unicode
code point, i.e. from U+000000 to U+10FFFF.

    >> String.fromCodePoint(0x1F4A9)'💩' // U+1F4A9

For backwards compatibility with ECMAScript 5 and older environments,
use [a `String.fromCodePoint()` polyfill](http://mths.be/fromcodepoint).

### Getting a symbol out of a string

If you use `String.prototype.charAt(position)` to retrieve the first
symbol in the string containing the pile of poo character, you’ll only
get the first surrogate half instead of the whole symbol.

    >> '💩'.charAt(0) // U+1F4A9'\uD83D' // U+D83D, i.e. the first surrogate half for U+1F4A9

There’s a [proposal to introduce `String.prototype.at(position)` in
ECMAScript
6](https://mail.mozilla.org/pipermail/es-discuss/2013-October/034240.html).
It would be like `charAt` except it deals with full symbols instead of
surrogate halves whenever possible.

    >> '💩'.at(0) // U+1F4A9'💩' // U+1F4A9

For backwards compatibility with ECMAScript 5 and older environments, [a
`String.prototype.at()` polyfill/prollyfill is
available](http://mths.be/at).

### Getting a code point out of a string

Similarly, if you use `String.prototype.charCodeAt(position)` to
retrieve the code point of the first symbol in the string, you’ll get
the code point of the first surrogate half instead of the code point of
the pile of poo character.

    >> '💩'.charCodeAt(0)0xD83D

Luckily, ECMAScript 6 introduces
`String.prototype.codePointAt(position)`, which is like `charCodeAt`
except it deals with full symbols instead of surrogate halves whenever
possible.

    >> '💩'.codePointAt(0)0x1F4A9

For backwards compatibility with ECMAScript 5 and older environments,
use [a `String.prototype.codePointAt()`
polyfill](http://mths.be/codepointat).

### Iterating over all symbols in a string

Let’s say you want to loop over every symbol in a string and do
something with each separate symbol.

In ECMAScript 5 you’d have to write a lot of boilerplate code just to
account for surrogate pairs:

    function getSymbols(string) {  var length = string.length;  var index = -1;  var output = [];  var character;  var charCode;  while (++index < length) {    character = string.charAt(index);    charCode = character.charCodeAt(0);    if (charCode >= 0xD800 && charCode <= 0xDBFF) {      // note: this doesn’t account for lone high surrogates      output.push(character + string.charAt(++index));    } else {      output.push(character);    }  }  return output;}var symbols = getSymbols('💩');symbols.forEach(function(symbol) {  assert(symbol == '💩');});

In ECMAScript 6, you can simply use `for…of`. The string iterator deals
with whole symbols instead of surrogate pairs.

    for (let symbol of '💩') {  assert(symbol == '💩');}

Unfortunately there’s no way to polyfill this, as `for…of` is a
grammar-level construct.

### Other issues

This behavior affects pretty much all string methods, including those
that weren’t explicitly mentioned here (such as
`String.prototype.substring`, `String.prototype.slice`, etc.) so be
careful when using them.

Issues with Unicode in regular expressions
------------------------------------------

### Matching code points and Unicode scalar values

The dot operator (`.`) in regular expressions only matches a single
“character”… But since JavaScript exposes surrogate halves as separate
“characters”, it won’t ever match an astral symbol.

    >> /foo.bar/.test('foo💩bar')false

Let’s think about this for a second… What regular expression could we
use to match any Unicode symbol? Any ideas? As demonstrated, `.` is not
sufficient, because [it doesn’t match line
breaks](http://ecma-international.org/ecma-262/5.1/#sec-15.10.2.8) or
whole astral symbols.

    >> /^.$/.test('💩')false

To match line breaks correctly, we could use `[\s\S]` instead, but that
still won’t match whole astral symbols.

    >> /^[\s\S]$/.test('💩')false

As it turns out, the **regular expression to match any Unicode code
point** is not very straight-forward at all:

    >> /^[\0-\uD7FF\uDC00-\uFFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF]$/.test('💩') // wtftrue

Of course, you wouldn’t want to write these regular expressions by hand,
let alone debug them. To generate the previous regex, I’ve used
[*Regenerate*](http://mths.be/regenerate), a library to easily create
regular expressions based on a list of code points or symbols:

    >> regenerate.fromCodePointRange(0x0, 0x10FFFF)'[\0-\uD7FF\uDC00-\uFFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF]'

From left to right, this regex matches BMP symbols, or surrogate pairs
(astral symbols), or lone surrogates.

While lone surrogates are technically allowed in JavaScript strings,
they don’t map to any symbols by themselves, and should be avoided. The
term [*Unicode scalar
values*](http://www.unicode.org/glossary/#unicode_scalar_value) refers
to all code points except for surrogate code points. Here’s a regular
expression is created that matches any Unicode scalar value:

    >> regenerate()     .addRange(0x0, 0x10FFFF)     // all Unicode code points     .removeRange(0xD800, 0xDBFF) // minus high surrogates     .removeRange(0xDC00, 0xDFFF) // minus low surrogates     .toRegExp()/[\0-\uD7FF\uE000-\uFFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]/

[Regenerate](http://mths.be/regenerate) is meant to be used as part of a
build script, to create complex regular expressions while still keeping
the script that generates them very readable and easily to maintain.

ECMAScript 6 [will hopefully
introduce](http://norbertlindenberg.com/2012/05/ecmascript-supplementary-characters/#RegExp)
a `u` flag for regular expressions that causes the `.` operator to match
whole code points instead of surrogate halves.

    >> /foo.bar/.test('foo💩bar')false>> /foo.bar/u.test('foo💩bar')true

When the `u` flag is set, `.` is equivalent to the following
backwards-compatible regular expression pattern:

    >> regenerate()     .addRange(0x0, 0x10FFFF) // all Unicode code points     .remove(  // minus `LineTerminator`s (http://ecma-international.org/ecma-262/5.1/#sec-7.3):       0x000A, // Line Feed <LF>       0x000D, // Carriage Return <CR>       0x2028, // Line Separator <LS>       0x2029  // Paragraph Separator <PS>     )     .toString();'[\0-\x09\x0B\x0C\x0E-\u2027\u202A-\uD7FF\uDC00-\uFFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF]'>> /foo(?:[\0-\x09\x0B\x0C\x0E-\u2027\u202A-\uD7FF\uDC00-\uFFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF])bar/u.test('foo💩bar')true

### Astral ranges in character classes

Considering that `/[a-c]/` matches any symbol from [U+0061 LATIN SMALL
LETTER A](http://codepoints.net/U+0061) to [U+0063 LATIN SMALL LETTER
C](http://codepoints.net/U+0063), it might seem like `/[💩-💫]/` would
match any symbol from [U+1F4A9 PILE OF
POO](http://codepoints.net/U+1F4A9) to [U+1F4AB DIZZY
SYMBOL](http://codepoints.net/U+1F4AB). This is however not the case:

    >> /[💩-💫]/SyntaxError: Invalid regular expression: Range out of order in character class

The reason this happens is because that regular expression is equivalent
to:

    >> /[\uD83D\uDCA9-\uD83D\uDCAB]/SyntaxError: Invalid regular expression: Range out of order in character class

Instead of matching U+1F4A9, U+1F4AA, and U+1F4AB like we wanted to,
instead the regex matches:

-   U+D83D (a high surrogate), or…
-   the range from U+DCA9 to U+D83D (which is invalid, because the
    starting code point is greater than the code point marking the end
    of the range), or…
-   U+DCAB (a low surrogate).

ECMAScript 6 allows you to opt in to the more sensical behavior by —
once again — using the magical `/u` flag.

    >> /[\uD83D\uDCA9-\uD83D\uDCAB]/u.test('\uD83D\uDCA9') // match U+1F4A9true>> /[\u{1F4A9}-\u{1F4AB}]/u.test('\u{1F4A9}') // match U+1F4A9true>> /[💩-💫]/u.test('💩') // match U+1F4A9true>> /[\uD83D\uDCA9-\uD83D\uDCAB]/u.test('\uD83D\uDCAA') // match U+1F4AAtrue>> /[\u{1F4A9}-\u{1F4AB}]/u.test('\u{1F4AA}') // match U+1F4AAtrue>> /[💩-💫]/u.test('💪') // match U+1F4AAtrue>> /[\uD83D\uDCA9-\uD83D\uDCAB]/u.test('\uD83D\uDCAB') // match U+1F4ABtrue>> /[\u{1F4A9}-\u{1F4AB}]/u.test('\u{1F4AB}') // match U+1F4ABtrue>> /[💩-💫]/u.test('💫') // match U+1F4ABtrue

Sadly, this solution isn’t backwards compatible with ECMAScript 5 and
older environments. If that is a concern, you should use
[*Regenerate*](http://mths.be/regenerate) to generate ES5-compatible
regular expressions that deal with astral ranges, or astral symbols in
general:

    >> regenerate.fromSymbolRange('💩', '💫')'\uD83D[\uDCA9-\uDCAB]'>> /^\uD83D[\uDCA9-\uDCAB]$/.test('💩') // match U+1F4A9true>> /^\uD83D[\uDCA9-\uDCAB]$/.test('💪') // match U+1F4AAtrue>> /^\uD83D[\uDCA9-\uDCAB]$/.test('💫') // match U+1F4ABtrue

Real-world bugs and how to avoid them
-------------------------------------

This behavior leads to many issues. Twitter, for example, allows 140
characters per tweet, and their back-end doesn’t mind what kind of
symbol it is — astral or not. But because the JavaScript counter on
their website at some point simply read out the string’s `length`
without accounting for surrogate pairs, it wasn’t possible to enter more
than 70 astral symbols. (The bug has since been fixed.)

Many JavaScript libraries that deal with strings fail to account for
astral symbols properly.

For example, when *Countable.js* was released, [it didn’t count astral
symbols correctly](https://github.com/RadLikeWhoa/Countable/issues/9).

*Underscore.string* has an implementation of `reverse` that [doesn’t
handle combining marks or astral
symbols](https://github.com/epeli/underscore.string/issues/220). (Use
[Missy Elliot’s algorithm](http://mths.be/esrever) instead.)

It also [incorrectly decodes HTML numeric entities for astral
symbols](https://github.com/epeli/underscore.string/issues/218), such as
`&#x1F4A9;`. Lots of other HTML entity conversion
[libraries](https://github.com/pierreliefauche/htmlentities.js/issues/4)
[have](https://github.com/vokidas/html-pe/issues/1)
[similar](https://github.com/substack/node-ent/pull/7)
[problems](https://github.com/fb55/node-entities/issues/11). (Until
these bugs are fixed, consider using [*he*](http://mths.be/he) instead
for all your HTML-encoding/decoding needs.)

These are all easy mistakes to make — after all, the way JavaScript
handles Unicode is just plain annoying. This write-up already
demonstrated how these bugs can be fixed; but how can we prevent them?

Introducing… The Pile of Poo Test™
----------------------------------

Whenever you’re working on a piece of JavaScript code that deals with
strings or regular expressions in some way, **just add a unit test that
contains a pile of poo (`💩`) in a string**, and see if anything breaks.
It’s a quick, fun, and easy way to see if your code supports astral
symbols. Once you’ve found a Unicode-related bug in your code, all you
need to do is apply the techniques discussed in this post to fix it.

A good test string for Unicode support in general is the following:
`Iñtërnâtiônàlizætiøn☃💩`. Its first 20 symbols are in the range from
U+0000 to U+00FF, then there’s a symbol in the range from U+0100 to
U+FFFF, and finally there’s an astral symbol (from the range of U+010000
to U+10FFFF).

TL;DR Go forth and submit pull requests with piles of poo in them. It’s
the only way to *Unicode the Web Forward®*.

**Disclaimer:** This post is based on the latest ES6 draft and the
various strawmans and proposals to further improve Unicode support in
JavaScript. Some of these new features may not make it to the final ES6
specification.

Slides
------

This write-up summarizes the various presentations I’ve given on the
subject of Unicode in JavaScript over the past few years. The slides I
used for those talks are embedded below.

Want me to give this presentation at your meetup/conference? [Let’s
talk.](/contact)

Translations
------------

-   Korean: [자바스크립트의 유니코드
    문제](http://ujinbot.blogspot.kr/2013/10/blog-post.html) by Eugene
    Byun

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/24e08a9ea84deb17ae121074d0f17125?s=105)

About me
--------

My name’s Mathias Bynens, and I’m a freelance web developer from
Belgium. I collaborate on open-source projects such as
[jsPerf](//jsperf.com/) and [HTML5
Boilerplate](//html5boilerplate.com/). If that sounds like fun to you,
you should [follow me on Twitter](https://twitter.com/mathias) and
[GitHub](https://github.com/mathiasbynens).

Comments
========

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/3ce3f6fc25037817b0b6eb72789e4365?s=30)

[Erik Arvidsson](//erik.eae.net/) wrote on [20th October 2013 at
22:13](#comment-1 "Permanent link to comment 1 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

Great post.

Unfortunately the `u` flag for regexps is probably not making it into
ES6. The spec text is missing and there is no champion.

This might not be the right medium to ask but will you be the champion
for this?

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/24e08a9ea84deb17ae121074d0f17125?s=30)

[Mathias](/) wrote on [20th October 2013 at
22:24](#comment-2 "Permanent link to comment 2 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

[**Erik:**](#comment-1)

> This might not be the right medium to ask but will you be the champion
> for this?

Sounds like fun! What *exactly* does this entail, though? I’d definitely
love to help out where I can. (Sent you an email.)

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/1b5088e074b3bf27ac244eb2ce1eaba5?s=30)

[Niloy Mondal](//niloy.github.io/) wrote on [21st October 2013 at
13:29](#comment-3 "Permanent link to comment 3 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

Why is ES6 introducing `fromCodePoint` — can’t we simply fix the code in
`fromCharCode`?

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/24e08a9ea84deb17ae121074d0f17125?s=30)

[Mathias](/) wrote on [21st October 2013 at
14:13](#comment-4 "Permanent link to comment 4 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

[**Niloy:**](#comment-3) Unfortunately, changing the behavior of all the
existing string methods and properties would break backwards
compatibility. Code that relies on the current behavior would break.
Adding new methods and properties is the only option.

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/424d1153b8de1b01826acb949db816ad?s=30)

Joshua Tenner wrote on [22nd October 2013 at
14:35](#comment-5 "Permanent link to comment 5 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

[**Mathias:**](#comment-4) I understand the reason for this, but it’s
the same logic as: “My code is a pile of poo, instead of fixing it, I’m
going to make more potential piles of poo, but it’s good piles of poo
for now.”

Sarcasm aside, great article!

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/37881c0540fb86ebfa6c855e61021527?s=30)

[Tab Atkins Jr.](//xanthir.com/) wrote on [22nd October 2013 at
17:51](#comment-6 "Permanent link to comment 6 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

[**Joshua:**](#comment-5) Not quite. It’s not *your* code you’re worried
about, it’s all the other millions of independent pieces of code relying
on your code. We can’t fix all of them, so we have to leave the bad code
in and just offer a migration path to something better.

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/5b3348465b6c46f3eaf9cf759d3e445d?s=30)

Josef wrote on [23rd October 2013 at
15:29](#comment-7 "Permanent link to comment 7 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

Couldn’t the behavior be implemented with something like [Strict
Mode](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions_and_function_scope/Strict_mode)?

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/24e08a9ea84deb17ae121074d0f17125?s=30)

[Mathias](/) wrote on [23rd October 2013 at
17:51](#comment-8 "Permanent link to comment 8 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

[**Josef:**](#comment-7) No, as existing strict mode code relies on the
behavior as well. You’d have to introduce yet another mode, but that
complicates the language even more, and there is no point anyway since
you could just add other methods and properties instead.

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/7dd8cf5ab16e43aad2185007fdd2fe47?s=30)

[Anup](//www.onenaught.com/) wrote on [27th October 2013 at
08:25](#comment-9 "Permanent link to comment 9 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

Thanks for this article. We discovered some of these issues a few weeks
back when looking into what issues our app might have supporting Thai
and weren’t sure how to proceed.

This article may give us a few useful things to pursue now. (We have to
also ensure if we make changes to our JavaScript layer that our server
layer supports such changes in a consistent way — e.g., simple-sounding
string length validation we have in both layers…)

Thanks!

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/b928accd038cf24ef3f14cb5dd758b04?s=30)

Nicolas Joyard wrote on [12th February 2014 at
09:09](#comment-10 "Permanent link to comment 10 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

Great article, thanks.

Of course fixing existing methods is not an option, but they could at
least be changed to log warnings in browser consoles.

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/f6a35c85d26694e26bb92ea4d4262c77?s=30)

[Marijn](//marijnhaverbeke.nl/) wrote on [12th February 2014 at
09:16](#comment-11 "Permanent link to comment 11 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

Your combining marks regexp seems to miss most extending characters.
Here’s the one CodeMirror uses:
[https://github.com/marijnh/CodeMirror/blob/b78c9d04fc8b3/lib/codemirror.js\#L6780](https://github.com/marijnh/CodeMirror/blob/b78c9d04fc8b3/lib/codemirror.js#L6780)
(which I generated from the Unicode database, including all code points
marked `Gr_Ext`).

![image](//gravatar.com/avatar/3e42479b6063be4a85f9974d2161dadf?s=30)

Neil Rashbrook wrote on [12th February 2014 at
11:25](#comment-12 "Permanent link to comment 12 on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”"):

Those regexps seem unnecessarily complicated. Take these examples:

    /[\0-\uD7FF\uE000-\uFFFF]//[\0-\uD7FF\uDC00-\uFFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]|[\uD800-\uDBFF]/

I would write them as:

    /[^\uD800-\uDFFF]//[\uD800-\uDBFF][\uDC00-\uDFFF]|[\s\S]/

Leave a comment
===============

Comment on “JavaScript has a Unicode problem”

Name *\**

Email *\**

Website

Some Markdown is allowed; HTML isn’t. Keyboard shortcuts are available.

It’s possible to add emphasis to text:

    _Emphasize_ some terms. Perhaps you’d rather use **strong emphasis** instead?

Select some text and press ⌘ + I on Mac or Ctrl + I on Windows to make
it italic. For bold text, use ⌘ + B or Ctrl + B.

To create links:

    Here’s an inline link to [Google](http://www.google.com/).

If the link itself is not descriptive enough to tell users where they’re
going, you might want to create a link with a `title` attribute, which
will show up on hover:

    Here’s a [poorly-named link](http://www.google.com/ "Google").

Use backticks (`` ` ``) to create an inline `<code>` span:

    In HTML, the `p` element represents a paragraph.

Select some inline text and press ⌘ + K on Mac or Ctrl + K on Windows to
make it a `<code>` span.

Indent four spaces to create an escaped `<pre><code>` block:

        printf("goodbye world!"); /* his suicide note                                 was in C */

Alternatively, you could use triple backtick syntax:

    ```printf("goodbye world!"); /* his suicide note                             was in C */```

Select a block of text (more than one line) and press ⌘ + K on Mac or
Ctrl + K on Windows to make it a preformatted `<code>` block.

Quoting text can be done as follows:

    > Lorem iPad dolor sit amet, consectetur Apple adipisicing elit,> sed do eiusmod incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua Shenzhen.> Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud no multi-tasking ullamco laboris> nisi ut aliquip iPad ex ea commodo consequat.

Select a block of text and press ⌘ + E on Mac or Ctrl + E on Windows to
make it a `<blockquote>`.

Spammer? (Enter ‘no’) *\**

© 1988—2014 Mathias Bynens\
Powered by [Qiwi](//qiwi.be/ "Qiwi webdesign en webontwikkeling")

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://mathiasbynens.be/notes/javascript-unicode
