[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

The 10,000 Hour Rule Is Wrong and Perpetuates a Cruel Myth
==========================================================

[](#)

[](#)

[](#comments)
[](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AThe%2010%2C000%20Hour%20Rule%20Is%20Wrong%20and%20Perpetuates%20a%20Cruel%20Myth%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html?wpsrc=sh_all_dt_em_ru)

[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[](#)

[Slate](http://www.slate.com)

[Science](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science.html)

The state of the universe.

Sept. 28 2014 7:45 PM

Practice Does Not Make Perfect
==============================

[](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html)

[](#comments)

We are not all created equal where our genes and abilities are concerned.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

By [David Z.
Hambrick](http://www.slate.com/authors.david_z_hambrick.html), [Fernanda
Ferreira](http://www.slate.com/authors.fernanda_ferreira.html), and
[John M. Henderson](http://www.slate.com/authors.john_m_henderson.html)

[](#comments)

[](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html)

[](whatsapp://send?text=The%2010%2C000%20Hour%20Rule%20perpetuates%20cruel%20myths.%20The%20science%20of%20genes%20and%20equality.%20http%3A%2F%2Fwww.slate.com%2Farticles%2Fhealth_and_science%2Fscience%2F2014%2F09%2Fmalcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html%3Fwpsrc%3Dsh_all_mob_wa_top)

[](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AThe%2010%2C000%20Hour%20Rule%20Is%20Wrong%20and%20Perpetuates%20a%20Cruel%20Myth%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html?wpsrc=sh_all_mob_em_top)

![Members of Iraq's National Symphony Orchestra (INSO) perform during a
concert at the National Theatre in Baghdad October 28,
2011.](/content/dam/slate/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/140926_SCI_MusicianPractice.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140926_SCI_MusicianPractice")
Members of Iraq's National Symphony Orchestra perform at the National
Theatre in Baghdad on Oct. 28, 2011. Not everyone needs 10,000 hours of
practice to be great at something.

Mahmoud Raouf Mahmoud/Reuters

A decade ago, [Magnus
Carlsen](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html),
who at the time was only 13 years old, created a sensation in the chess
world when he defeated former world champion Anatoly Karpov at a chess
tournament in Reykjavik, Iceland, and [the next day
played](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WjEmquJhSas) then-top-rated
Garry Kasparov—who is widely regarded as the best chess player of all
time—to a draw. Carlsen’s subsequent rise to chess stardom was meteoric:
grandmaster status later in 2004; a share of first place in the
Norwegian Chess Championship in 2006; youngest player ever to reach
World No. 1 in 2010; and highest-rated player in history in 2012.

What explains this sort of spectacular success? What makes someone rise
to the top in music, games, sports, business, or science? This question
is the subject of one of psychology’s oldest debates. In the late 1800s,
Francis Galton—founder of the scientific study of intelligence and a
cousin of Charles Darwin—analyzed the genealogical records of hundreds
of scholars, artists, musicians, and other professionals and found that
greatness tends to run in families. For example, he counted more than 20
eminent musicians in the Bach family. (Johann Sebastian was just the
most famous.) Galton concluded that experts are “born.” Nearly half a
century later, the behaviorist John Watson countered that experts are
“made” when he famously guaranteed that he could take any infant at
random and “train him to become any type of specialist [he] might
select—doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant-chief and, yes, even beggar-man
and thief, regardless of his talents.”

One player needed *22 times* more deliberate practice than another
player to become a master.

The experts-are-made view has dominated the discussion in recent
decades. In a pivotal 1993
[article](http://graphics8.nytimes.com/images/blogs/freakonomics/pdf/DeliberatePractice(PsychologicalReview).pdf)
published in *Psychological Review*—psychology’s most prestigious
journal—the Swedish psychologist K. Anders Ericsson and his colleagues
proposed that performance differences across people in domains such as
music and chess largely reflect differences in the amount of time people
have spent engaging in “deliberate practice,” or training exercises
specifically designed to improve performance. To test this idea,
Ericsson and colleagues recruited violinists from an elite Berlin music
academy and asked them to estimate the amount of time per week they had
devoted to deliberate practice for each year of their musical careers.
The major finding of the study was that the most accomplished musicians
had accumulated the most hours of deliberate practice. For example, the
average for elite violinists was about 10,000 hours, compared with only
about 5,000 hours for the least accomplished group. In a second study,
the difference for pianists was even greater—an average of more than
10,000 hours for experts compared with only about 2,000 hours for
amateurs. Based on these findings, Ericsson and colleagues argued that
prolonged effort, not innate talent, explained differences between
experts and novices.

![Illustration by Robert
Neubecker.](/content/dam/slate/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/140929_MUSIC_Practice.jpg.CROP.original-original.jpg "140929_MUSIC_Practice")

Illustration by Robert Neubecker.

These findings filtered their way into pop culture. They were the
inspiration for what Malcolm Gladwell termed the [“10,000 Hour
Rule”](http://gladwell.com/outliers/the-10000-hour-rule/) in his book
[*Outliers*](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0316017930/?tag=slatmaga-20)*,*which
in turn was the inspiration for the song [“Ten Thousand
Hours”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l04y9Rl3c3A) by the hip-hop duo
Macklemore and Ryan Lewis, the opening track on their Grammy-award
winning album [*The
Heist*](http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00908DDZM/?tag=slatmaga-20)*.*
However, recent research has demonstrated that deliberate practice,
while undeniably important, is only one piece of the expertise
puzzle—and not necessarily the biggest piece. In the first
[study](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17201516) to convincingly
make this point, the cognitive psychologists Fernand Gobet and Guillermo
Campitelli found that chess players differed greatly in the amount of
deliberate practice they needed to reach a given skill level in chess.
For example, the number of hours of deliberate practice to first reach
“master” status (a very high level of skill) ranged from 728 hours to
16,120 hours. This means that one player needed *22 times* more
deliberate practice than another player to become a master.

A recent
[meta-analysis](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=(Macnamara+and+Hambrick))
by Case Western Reserve University psychologist Brooke Macnamara and her
colleagues (including the first author of this article for ***Slate***)
came to the same conclusion. We searched through more than 9,000
potentially relevant publications and ultimately identified 88 studies
that collected measures of activities interpretable as deliberate
practice and reported their relationships to corresponding measures of
skill. (Analyzing a set of studies can reveal an average correlation
between two variables that is statistically more precise than the result
of any individual study.) With very few exceptions, deliberate practice
correlated positively with skill. In other words, people who reported
practicing a lot tended to perform better than those who reported
practicing less. But the correlations were far from perfect: Deliberate
practice left more of the variation in skill *unexplained* than it
explained. For example, deliberate practice explained 26 percent of the
variation for games such as chess, 21 percent for music, and 18 percent
for sports. So, deliberate practice did not explain all, nearly all, or
even most of the performance variation in these fields. In concrete
terms, what this evidence means is that racking up a lot of deliberate
practice is no guarantee that you’ll become an expert. Other factors
matter.

If one identical twin was good at drawing, it was quite likely that his
or her identical sibling was, too.

What are these other factors? There are undoubtedly many. One may be the
age at which a person starts an activity. In their study, Gobet and
Campitelli found that chess players who started playing early reached
higher levels of skill as adults than players who started later, even
after taking into account the fact that the early starters had
accumulated more deliberate practice than the later starters. There may
be a critical window during childhood for acquiring certain complex
skills, just as there seems to be for language.

There is now compelling evidence that genes matter for success, too. In
a [study](http://www.teds.ac.uk/about.html) led by the King’s College
London psychologist Robert Plomin*,*more than 15,000 twins in the United
Kingdom were identified through birth records and recruited to perform a
battery of tests and questionnaires, including a test of drawing ability
in which the children were asked to sketch a person. In a recently
published analysis of the data, researchers
[found](http://www.kcl.ac.uk/ioppn/news/records/2014/August/Childrens-drawings-indicate-later-intelligence.aspx)
that there was a stronger correspondence in drawing ability for the
identical twins than for the fraternal twins. In other words, if one
identical twin was good at drawing, it was quite likely that his or her
identical sibling was, too. Because identical twins share 100 percent of
their genes, whereas fraternal twins share only 50 percent on average,
this finding indicates that differences across people in basic artistic
ability are in part due to genes. In a separate
[study](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=(Plomin)%20AND%20expert)
based on this U.K. sample, well over half of the variation between
expert and less skilled readers was found to be due to genes.

In another [study](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25079217), a team
of researchers at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden led by psychologist
Miriam Mosing had more than 10,000 twins estimate the amount of time
they had devoted to music practice and complete tests of basic music
abilities, such as determining whether two melodies carry the same
rhythm. The surprising discovery of this study was that although the
music abilities were influenced by genes—to the tune of about 38
percent, on average—there was no evidence they were influenced by
practice. For a pair of identical twins, the twin who practiced music
more did *not* do better on the tests than the twin who practiced less.
This finding does not imply that there is no point in practicing if you
want to become a musician. The sort of abilities captured by the tests
used in this study aren’t the only things necessary for playing music at
a high level; things such as being able to read music, finger a
keyboard, and commit music to memory also matter, and they require
practice. But it *does* imply that there are limits on the
transformative power of practice. As Mosing and her colleagues
concluded, practice does not make perfect.

Along the same lines, biologist Michael Lombardo and psychologist Robert
Deaner [examined](https://peerj.com/articles/445/) the biographies of
male and female Olympic sprinters such as Jesse Owens, Marion Jones, and
Usain Bolt, and found that, in all cases, they were exceptional compared
with their competitors from the very start of their sprinting
careers—before they had accumulated much more practice than their peers.

What all of this evidence indicates is that we are not created equal
where our abilities are concerned. This conclusion might make you
uncomfortable, and understandably so. Throughout history, so much wrong
has been done in the name of false beliefs about genetic inequality
between different groups of people—males vs. females, blacks vs. whites,
and so on. War, slavery, and genocide are the most horrifying examples
of the dangers of such beliefs, and there are countless others. In the
United States, women were denied the right to vote until 1920 because
too many people believed that women were constitutionally incapable of
good judgment; in some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, they still are
believed to be. Ever since John Locke laid the groundwork for the
Enlightenment by proposing that we are born as *tabula rasa*—blank
slates—the idea that we are created equal has been the central tenet of
the “modern” worldview. Enshrined as it is in the Declaration of
Independence as a “self-evident truth,” this idea has special
significance for Americans. Indeed, it is the cornerstone of the
American dream—the belief that anyone can become anything they want with
enough determination.

Pretending we have the same abilities perpetuates the myth that people
can help themselves if they just try hard enough.

It is therefore crucial to differentiate between the influence of genes
on differences in abilities across*individuals* and the influence of
genes on differences across *groups*. The former has been established
beyond any reasonable doubt by decades of research in a number of
fields, including psychology, biology, and behavioral genetics. There is
now an overwhelming scientific consensus that genes contribute to
individual differences in abilities. The latter has never been
established, and any [claim to the
contrary](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/05/troublesome_inheritance_critique_nicholas_wade_s_dated_assumptions_about.html)
is simply false.

Another reason the idea of genetic inequality might make you
uncomfortable is because it raises the specter of an anti-meritocratic
society in which benefits such as good educations and high-paying jobs
go to people who happen to be born with “good” genes. As the technology
of genotyping progresses, it is not far-fetched to think that we will
all one day have information about our genetic makeup, and that
others—physicians, law enforcement, even employers or insurance
companies—may have access to this information and use it to make
decisions that profoundly affect our lives. However, this concern
conflates scientific evidence with how that evidence might be used—which
is to say that information about genetic diversity can just as easily be
used for good as for ill.

Take the example of intelligence, as measured by IQ. We know from many
decades of research in behavioral genetics that about half of the
variation across people in IQ is due to genes. Among many other
outcomes, [IQ predicts success in
school](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/04/what_do_sat_and_iq_tests_measure_general_intelligence_predicts_school_and.html),
and so once we have identified specific genes that account for
individual differences in IQ, this information could be used to
identify, at birth, children with the greatest genetic potential for
academic success and channel them into the best schools. This would
probably create a society even more unequal than the one we have. But
this information could just as easily be used to identify children with
the *least* genetic potential for academic success and channel *them*
into the best schools. This would probably create a more equal society
than the one we have, and it would do so by identifying those who are
likely to face learning challenges and provide them with the support
they might need. Science and policy are two different things, and when
we dismiss the former because we assume it will influence the latter in
a particular and pernicious way, we limit the good that can be done.

Wouldn’t it be better to just act *as if* we are equal, evidence to the
contrary notwithstanding? That way, no people will be discouraged from
chasing their dreams—competing in the Olympics or performing at Carnegie
Hall or winning a Nobel Prize. The answer is no, for two reasons. The
first is that failure is costly, both to society and to individuals.
Pretending that all people are equal in their abilities will not change
the fact that a person with an average IQ is unlikely to become a
theoretical physicist, or the fact that a person with a low level of
music ability is unlikely to become a concert pianist. It makes more
sense to pay attention to people’s abilities and their likelihood of
achieving certain goals, so people can make good decisions about the
goals they want to spend their time, money, and energy pursuing.
Moreover, genes influence not only our abilities, but the environments
we create for ourselves and the activities we prefer—a phenomenon known
as *gene-environment correlation.*For example, yet another recent [twin
study](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24957535) (and the Karolinska
Institute study) found that there was a genetic influence on practicing
music. Pushing someone into a career for which he or she is genetically
unsuited will likely not work.

[](#lf_comment=218504279)

Top Comment

First of all, does anyone actually doubt this? Do people actually think
that they COULD have been Usain Bolt, or Serena Williams, or YoYo Ma, if
only they'd practiced 10,000 hours (which really, is not that much
anyway)? More...

-BAS

[](#comments) [Join In](#comments)

The second reason we should not pretend we are endowed with the same
abilities is that doing so perpetuates the myth that is at the root of
much inaction in society—the myth that people can help themselves to the
same degree if they just try hard enough. You’re not a heart surgeon?
That’s your fault for not working hard enough in school! You didn’t make
it as a concert pianist? You must not have wanted it that badly.
Societal inequality is thus justified on the grounds that anyone who is
willing to put in the requisite time and effort can succeed and should
be rewarded with a good life, whereas those who struggle to make ends
meet are to blame for their situations and should pull themselves up by
their own bootstraps. If we acknowledge that people differ in what they
have to contribute, then we have an argument for a society in which all
human beings are entitled to a life that includes access to decent
housing, health care, and education, simply because they are human. Our
abilities might not be identical, and our needs surely differ, but our
basic human rights are universal.

David Z. Hambrick is a professor at Michigan State University and an
associate editor of the *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.*

Fernanda Ferreira is College of Arts and Sciences distinguished
professor at the University of South Carolina.

John M. Henderson is College of Arts and Sciences distinguished
professor and director of the Institute for Mind and Brain at the
University of South Carolina.

[REPRINT](http://www.slatereprints.com/reprint-products-quote-request/?cf2_field_17=http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html&cf2_field_18=www.slate.com&cf2_field_19=The+10%2C000+Hour+Rule+Is+Wrong+and+Perpetuates+a+Cruel+Myth&cf2_field_20=09%2F20%2F2013)
[PRINT](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.single.html?print)
[EMAIL](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AThe%2010%2C000%20Hour%20Rule%20Is%20Wrong%20and%20Perpetuates%20a%20Cruel%20Myth%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html?wpsrc=sh_all_dt_em_bot)

[](#) [](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html)

[](#comments)

[](#comments)

[](#)

[](#)
[](http://twitter.com/search?q=http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html)

[](whatsapp://send?text=The%2010%2C000%20Hour%20Rule%20perpetuates%20cruel%20myths.%20The%20science%20of%20genes%20and%20equality.%20http%3A%2F%2Fwww.slate.com%2Farticles%2Fhealth_and_science%2Fscience%2F2014%2F09%2Fmalcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html%3Fwpsrc%3Dsh_all_mob_wa_bot)

[](mailto:?subject=Check%20out%20this%20piece%20on%20Slate&body=I%20thought%20you%20might%20like%20this%20article%20on%20Slate:%0AThe%2010%2C000%20Hour%20Rule%20Is%20Wrong%20and%20Perpetuates%20a%20Cruel%20Myth%0Ahttp://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html?wpsrc=sh_all_mob_em_bot)

Load Comments

[Powered by Livefyre](http://livefyre.com)

### TODAY IN SLATE

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/republicans_attacking_democrats_on_obama_s_unpopular_foreign_policy_how.html)

Politics

The Democrats’ War at Home
==========================

How can the president’s party defend itself from the president’s foreign
policy blunders?

By John Dickerson

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/republicans_attacking_democrats_on_obama_s_unpopular_foreign_policy_how.html)
Politics

Sept. 30 2014 6:59 PM The Democrats’ War at Home How can the president’s
party defend itself from the president’s foreign policy blunders? John
Dickerson

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/ebola_transmission_rate_the_virus_doesn_t_spread_as_quickly_as_measles_and.html)

Why Time Is on Our Side in the Fight Against Ebola
==================================================

By Gerardo Chowell-Puente

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/ebola_transmission_rate_the_virus_doesn_t_spread_as_quickly_as_measles_and.html)
Future Tense

Oct. 1 2014 4:46 PM Why Time Is on Our Side in the Fight Against Ebola
Comparing this virus to scourges of the past gives us hope that we can
slow it down. Gerardo Chowell-Puente

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/at_the_values_voter_summit_the_religious_right_tried_to_keep_republicans.html)

The Religious Right Is Not Happy With Republicans
=================================================

By Amanda Marcotte

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/at_the_values_voter_summit_the_religious_right_tried_to_keep_republicans.html)
The XX Factor

Oct. 1 2014 4:58 PM The Religious Right Is Not Happy With Republicans
Amanda Marcotte

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/10/01/the_catacombs_of_capuchin_monastery_in_palermo_sicily.html)

![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/10/01/the_catacombs_of_capuchin_monastery_in_palermo_sicily/4958080316_6579d16200_b.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

Catacombs Where You Can Stroll Down Hallways Lined With Corpses
===============================================================

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/10/01/the_catacombs_of_capuchin_monastery_in_palermo_sicily.html)
Atlas Obscura

Oct. 1 2014 10:32 AM The Corpse-Lined Hallways of the Capuchin Monastery
Catacombs

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/television/2014/10/homeland_season_4_review_showtime_series_premiering_sunday_is_good_again.html)

![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/arts/television/2014/10/141001_TV_Danes.jpg.CROP.promo-small.jpg)

*Homeland* Is Good Again! For Now.
==================================

By Willa Paskin

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/television/2014/10/homeland_season_4_review_showtime_series_premiering_sunday_is_good_again.html)
Television

Oct. 1 2014 12:19 PM *Homeland* Is Good Again For now, at least. Willa
Paskin

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2014/10/white_boy_rick_richard_wershe_was_a_detroit_legend_and_an_fbi_informant.html)
Crime

Operation Backbone
==================

How White Boy Rick, a legendary Detroit cocaine dealer, helped the FBI
uncover brazen police corruption.

By Evan Hughes

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2014/10/white_boy_rick_richard_wershe_was_a_detroit_legend_and_an_fbi_informant.html)
Crime

Oct. 1 2014 4:15 PM Operation Backbone How White Boy Rick, a legendary
Detroit cocaine dealer, helped the FBI uncover brazen police corruption.
Evan Hughes

[THE SLATEST](/blogs/the_slatest.html) [SEE
ALL](/blogs/the_slatest.html)

-   [Secret Service Director
    Resigns](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/10/01/secret_service_director_resigns_julia_pierson_out_after_scandal.html)
-   [Michigan Football Mishandled Sexual Assault Case in Same Way It's
    Mishandled
    Concussion](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/10/01/michigan_football_sexual_assault_case_reminiscent_of_concussion_story.html)
-   [Muslim Writer Attacks Las Vegas-ization of Mecca in
    *Times*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/10/01/mecca_renovations_centuries_old_buildings_bulldozed_for_new_developments.html)
-   [Larry Craig Sanctioned for Financing Bathroom Sex Defense With
    Campaign
    Funds](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/10/01/larry_craig_campaign_funds_ruling_ex_montana_senator_owes_government.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2014/10/leonard_cohen_robert_plant_and_loudon_wainwright_iii_s_new_albums_reviewed.html)

Music

How Even an Old Hipster Can Age Gracefully
==========================================

On their new albums, Leonard Cohen, Robert Plant, and Loudon Wainwright
III show three ways.

By Carl Wilson

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2014/10/leonard_cohen_robert_plant_and_loudon_wainwright_iii_s_new_albums_reviewed.html)
Music

Oct. 1 2014 12:21 PM How Even an Old Hipster Can Age Gracefully On their
new albums, Leonard Cohen, Robert Plant, and Loudon Wainwright III show
three ways. Carl Wilson

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/10/01/syria_airstrikes_bashar_al_assad_is_the_u_s_losing_the_country_s_moderate.html)

The U.S. Has a New Problem in Syria: The Moderate Rebels Feel Like We’ve Betrayed Them
======================================================================================

By Joshua Keating
[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/piper_kerman_on_her_prison_sentencing_and_the_checked_50s_suit_she_wore.html)

Piper Kerman on Why She Dressed Like a Hitchcock Heroine for Her Prison Sentencing
==================================================================================

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/piper_kerman_on_her_prison_sentencing_and_the_checked_50s_suit_she_wore.html)
Brow Beat

Oct. 1 2014 8:46 AM Piper Kerman on Why She Dressed Like a Hitchcock
Heroine for Her Prison Sentencing

[Japanese Cheerleader Robots Balance and Roll Around on
Balls](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/japanese_manufacturer_murata_manufacturing_co_built_cheerleader_robots_to.html?wpisrc=hpsponsoredd2)

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/japanese_manufacturer_murata_manufacturing_co_built_cheerleader_robots_to.html)
Trending News Channel

Oct. 1 2014 1:25 PM Japanese Cheerleader Robots Balance and Roll Around
on Balls Slate V Staff

[Mourn Dead Apple Products in Our Virtual
Graveyard](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/mourn_discontinued_apple_products_like_the_ipod_classic_newton_ibook.html?wpisrc=hpsponsoredd2)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/mourn_discontinued_apple_products_like_the_ipod_classic_newton_ibook.html)
Behold

Oct. 1 2014 2:26 PM An Up-Close Look at the U.S.–Mexico Border Alyssa
Coppelman

[The Ludicrous Claims Pitched to Women at “Egg Freezing
Parties”](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/egg_freezing_marketing_campaigns_lie_about_success_rates_of_this_fertility.html?wpisrc=hpsponsoredd2)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/egg_freezing_marketing_campaigns_lie_about_success_rates_of_this_fertility.html)
Moneybox

Sept. 30 2014 11:51 PM Americans' Inexplicable Aversion to the 1990s
Matthew Yglesias

[Most Recent See All](/full_slate.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/10/american_league_wild_card_game_how_bad_was_the_kansas_city_royals_bunt_all.html)
Sports Nut

Oct. 1 2014 5:19 PM Bunt-a-Palooza! How bad was the Kansas City Royals’
bunt-all-the-time strategy in the American League wild-card game? Ben
Blatt

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/celebrity_feminists_karl_lagerfeld_and_emily_ratajkowski_make_feminism_fashionable.html)

The XX Factor

Oct. 1 2014 5:11 PM Celebrity Feminist Identification Has Reached Peak
Meaninglessness Amanda Hess

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/at_the_values_voter_summit_the_religious_right_tried_to_keep_republicans.html)
The XX Factor

Oct. 1 2014 4:58 PM The Religious Right Is Not Happy With Republicans
Amanda Marcotte

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/gentleman_scholar/2014/10/wedding_etiquette_choosing_a_best_man_also_negroni_recipes_and_tie_width.html)
Gentleman Scholar

Oct. 1 2014 4:55 PM Blood Before Bud? Must a gentleman’s brother always
be the best man at his wedding? Troy Patterson

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/ebola_transmission_rate_the_virus_doesn_t_spread_as_quickly_as_measles_and.html)
Future Tense

Oct. 1 2014 4:46 PM Ebola Is No Measles. That’s a Good Thing. Comparing
this virus to scourges of the past gives us hope that we can slow it
down. Gerardo Chowell-Puente

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/law_enforcement_has_declared_war_on_encryption_it_can_t_break.html)
Future Tense

Oct. 1 2014 4:44 PM Law Enforcement Has Declared War on Encryption It
Can’t Break Dan Gillmor

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/artist_risa_puno_asks_if_you_d_trade_your_privacy_for_a_cookie_slate_helps.html)
Future Tense

Oct. 1 2014 4:26 PM How to Measure the Value of Your Personal Data in
Cookies: A ***Slate***Guide Katy Waldman

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2014/10/white_boy_rick_richard_wershe_was_a_detroit_legend_and_an_fbi_informant.html)
Crime

Oct. 1 2014 4:15 PM The Trials of White Boy Rick A Detroit crime legend,
the FBI, and the ugliness of the war on drugs. Evan Hughes

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/say_yes_to_the_candidate_rick_scott_ad_knows_women_only_understand_wedding.html)
The XX Factor

Oct. 1 2014 4:05 PM Today in GOP Outreach to Women: You Broads Like
Wedding Dresses, Right? Amanda Marcotte

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/10/earth_hum_explained_taos_kokomo_u_k_hums_may_be_delusion_but_one_does_exist.html)
Science

Oct. 1 2014 4:03 PM Does the Earth Really Have a “Hum”? Yes, but
probably not the one you’re thinking. Paca Thomas

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/10/01/secret_service_director_resigns_julia_pierson_out_after_scandal.html)
The Slatest

Oct. 1 2014 4:03 PM Secret Service Director Resigns Ben Mathis-Lilley

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/10/sea_monkey_laser_study_small_ocean_creatures_can_move_currents_video.html)
Video

Oct. 1 2014 3:17 PM Amazing Live Sea-Monkeys The childhood “pets” have
come to the aid of ocean researchers. Jim Festante

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/you_re_the_worst_renewed_fx_show_the_best_of_the_summer_gets_a_season_2.html)
Brow Beat

Oct. 1 2014 3:02 PM The Best Show of the Summer Is Getting a Second
Season A.J. McCarthy

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/netizen_report_hong_kong_protests_trigger_surveillance_and_social_media.html)
Future Tense

Oct. 1 2014 3:01 PM Netizen Report: Hong Kong Protests Trigger
Surveillance and Social Media Censorship

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/10/the_wall_street_journal_and_steve_koonin_the_new_face_of_climate_change.html)
Science

Oct. 1 2014 2:36 PM Climate Science Is Settled *Enough* The *Wall Street
Journal*’s fresh face of climate inaction. Raymond T. Pierrehumbert

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/mourn_discontinued_apple_products_like_the_ipod_classic_newton_ibook.html)
Future Tense

Oct. 1 2014 2:26 PM The Apple**Graveyard Leave a flower for a dead Apple
product. Chris Kirk

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2014/10/01/michigan_football_sexual_assault_case_reminiscent_of_concussion_story.html)
The Slatest

Oct. 1 2014 2:25 PM Michigan Football Mishandled Sexual Assault Case in
Same Way It's Mishandled Concussion Ben Mathis-Lilley

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics.html) News & Politics

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Crime Oct. 1 2014 4:15 PM

[Was One of Detroit’s Most Notorious Criminals Really an FBI
Informant?](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2014/10/white_boy_rick_richard_wershe_was_a_detroit_legend_and_an_fbi_informant.html)

Evan Hughes

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2014/10/white_boy_rick_richard_wershe_was_a_detroit_legend_and_an_fbi_informant.html)
Crime

Oct. 1 2014 4:15 PM The Trials of White Boy Rick A Detroit crime legend,
the FBI, and the ugliness of the war on drugs. Evan Hughes

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The World Oct. 1 2014 12:20 PM

[Don’t Expect Hong Kong’s Protests to Spread to the
Mainland](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/10/01/hong_kong_protests_don_t_expect_them_to_spread_to_the_mainland.html)

Joshua Keating

[Don’t Expect Hong Kong’s Protests to Spread to the
Mainland](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/10/01/hong_kong_protests_don_t_expect_them_to_spread_to_the_mainland.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The World Oct. 1 2014 11:48 AM

[Syria’s “Moderate” Rebels Are Realizing That U.S. Airstrikes Help
Bashar al-Assad, Not
Them](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/10/01/syria_airstrikes_bashar_al_assad_is_the_u_s_losing_the_country_s_moderate.html)

Joshua Keating

[Syria’s “Moderate” Rebels Are Realizing That U.S. Airstrikes Help
Bashar al-Assad, Not
Them](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/10/01/syria_airstrikes_bashar_al_assad_is_the_u_s_losing_the_country_s_moderate.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 30 2014 9:33 PM

[Congress’ Public Shaming of the Secret Service Was Political
Grandstanding at Its
Best](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/julia_pierson_darrell_issa_the_house_oversight_committee_s_grilling_of_the.html)

Josh Voorhees

[Congress’ Public Shaming of the Secret Service Was Political
Grandstanding at Its
Best](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/julia_pierson_darrell_issa_the_house_oversight_committee_s_grilling_of_the.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 30 2014 6:59 PM

[How Can Democrats Defend Themselves From the President’s Foreign Policy
Blunders?](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/republicans_attacking_democrats_on_obama_s_unpopular_foreign_policy_how.html)

John Dickerson

[How Can Democrats Defend Themselves From the President’s Foreign Policy
Blunders?](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/republicans_attacking_democrats_on_obama_s_unpopular_foreign_policy_how.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 30 2014 5:19 PM

[Republicans No Longer Want to Debate Abortion, Gay Marriage, or
Contraception](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/republican_candidates_are_avoiding_social_issues_gop_politicians_don_t_want.html)

William Saletan

[Republicans No Longer Want to Debate Abortion, Gay Marriage, or
Contraception](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/republican_candidates_are_avoiding_social_issues_gop_politicians_don_t_want.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Jurisprudence Sept. 30 2014 2:36 PM

[The Supreme Court, Throughout Its History, Has Been a Massive
Disappointment](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2014/09/the_case_against_the_supreme_court_erwin_chemerinsky_says_justices_side.html)

Dahlia Lithwick

[The Supreme Court, Throughout Its History, Has Been a Massive
Disappointment](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2014/09/the_case_against_the_supreme_court_erwin_chemerinsky_says_justices_side.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 30 2014 1:38 PM

[Why 19,000 People Cheered for Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi at
Madison Square
Garden](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/narendra_modi_at_madison_square_garden_why_19_000_people_cheered_for_the.html)

Reihan Salam

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 30 2014 11:57 AM

[Iowa’s Joni Ernst Is Part of the Far-Right
Fringe](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/joni_ernst_is_a_far_right_conservative_the_gop_s_iowa_senate_candidate_is.html)

Jamelle Bouie

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Damned Spot Sept. 30 2014 9:00 AM

[Political Wives Really, Really Love Staring at Their Husbands in
Campaign
Ads](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/damned_spot/2014/09/wife_campaign_ad_supercut_best_of_the_adoring_political_wives_video.html)

John Dickerson and Olivia Merrion

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

History Sept. 29 2014 11:45 PM

[The Self-Made Man: The Story of America’s Most Pliable, Pernicious,
Irrepressible
Myth](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/history/2014/09/the_self_made_man_history_of_a_myth_from_ben_franklin_to_andrew_carnegie.html)

John Swansburg

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Foreigners Sept. 29 2014 10:00 PM

[Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi on Labor Reform and Doing Battle
With
Unions](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2014/09/matteo_renzi_interview_italy_s_prime_minister_on_labor_reform_iraq_isis.html)

Lally Weymouth

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Over There Sept. 29 2014 4:48 PM

[The Brutality of Colonialism and the Mess It Left Behind in
Africa](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/over_there/2014/09/brooklyn_brewery_war_correspondents_philip_gourevitch_on_coverage_of_africa.html)

A.J. McCarthy and Andy Zhao

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Foreigners Sept. 29 2014 3:59 PM

[Amazing Images From Hong Kong’s Umbrella
Revolution](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2014/09/occupy_central_with_love_and_peace_and_the_umbrella_revolution_pro_democracy.html)

Lisa Larson-Walker

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Politics Sept. 29 2014 11:35 AM

[What Romney Thinks About When He Thinks About Running for
President](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/will_mitt_romney_run_in_2016_the_former_gop_presidential_candidate_knows.html)

John Dickerson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Jurisprudence Sept. 29 2014 10:30 AM

[Texas Says a Student ID Isn’t Valid for Voting but a Gun Permit Is.
Will the Supreme Court Weigh
In?](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2014/09/voting_restrictions_may_reach_the_supreme_court_from_ohio_wisconsin_north.html)

Richard L. Hasen

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The World Sept. 29 2014 10:25 AM

[Do the Protests in Hong Kong Mean the “One Country, Two Systems” System
Is on the
Ropes?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_world_/2014/09/29/hong_kong_protests_is_the_one_country_two_systems_arrangement_on_the_ropes.html)

Joshua Keating

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/business.html) Business

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Oct. 1 2014 2:16 PM

[Wall Street Tackles Chat Services, Shies Away From Diversity
Issues](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/10/01/wall_street_culture_a_new_chat_service_from_symphony_and_lots_of_white_male.html)

Alison Griswold

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/10/01/wall_street_culture_a_new_chat_service_from_symphony_and_lots_of_white_male.html)
Moneybox

Oct. 1 2014 2:16 PM Wall Street Tackles Chat Services, Shies Away From
Diversity Issues Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Oct. 1 2014 1:11 PM

[This Company Wants to Fight World Hunger With
Flies](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/10/01/enviroflight_ohio_company_produces_fly_larvae_to_bring_down_costs_of_fish.html)

Bernhard Warner

[This Company Wants to Fight World Hunger With
Flies](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/10/01/enviroflight_ohio_company_produces_fly_larvae_to_bring_down_costs_of_fish.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Oct. 1 2014 12:21 PM

[How One Entrepreneur Is Making Blood Testing
Painless](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/10/01/theranos_elizabeth_holmes_painless_blood_testing_invention_makes_her_third.html)

Kevin Loria

[How One Entrepreneur Is Making Blood Testing
Painless](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/10/01/theranos_elizabeth_holmes_painless_blood_testing_invention_makes_her_third.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Buy a Small Business Oct. 1 2014 11:43 AM

[Tech Startups Have a Quiet, Dependable, Risk-Averse
Sibling](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/buy_a_small_business/2014/10/search_funds_the_quiet_dependable_risk_averse_sibling_to_the_startup.html)

Alison Griswold

[Tech Startups Have a Quiet, Dependable, Risk-Averse
Sibling](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/buy_a_small_business/2014/10/search_funds_the_quiet_dependable_risk_averse_sibling_to_the_startup.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Oct. 1 2014 8:34 AM

[The Private Sector Is Now a Big Backer of Renewable-Energy
Moonshots](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/10/renewable_energy_projects_the_private_sector_not_the_government_is_funding.html)

Daniel Gross

[The Private Sector Is Now a Big Backer of Renewable-Energy
Moonshots](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/10/renewable_energy_projects_the_private_sector_not_the_government_is_funding.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 30 2014 7:02 PM

[At Long Last, eBay Sets PayPal
Free](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/30/paypal_splits_from_ebay_with_the_spinoff_carl_icahn_gets_his_way.html)

Alison Griswold

[At Long Last, eBay Sets PayPal
Free](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/30/paypal_splits_from_ebay_with_the_spinoff_carl_icahn_gets_his_way.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Building a Better Workplace Sept. 30 2014 1:16 PM

[The Greatest Job Perk You’ve Never Heard Of:
“Pre-cation”](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/building_a_better_workplace/2014/09/precation_perks_companies_offer_employees_vacation_before_they_start.html)

Will Oremus

[The Greatest Job Perk You’ve Never Heard Of:
“Pre-cation”](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/building_a_better_workplace/2014/09/precation_perks_companies_offer_employees_vacation_before_they_start.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 30 2014 11:25 AM

[Contra Naomi Klein, Corporations Are Doing More Than Governments to
Halt Climate
Change](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/09/naomi_klein_is_wrong_corporations_are_doing_more_than_governments_to_halt.html)

Zachary Karabell

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 30 2014 10:44 AM

[America Is Overlooking a Plentiful Renewable Resource: Animal
Manure](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/09/america_is_overlooking_a_plentiful_renewable_resource_animal_manure.html)

Daniel Gross

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 29 2014 7:01 PM

[We May Never Know Whether Larry Ellison Flew a Fighter Jet Under the
Golden Gate
Bridge](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/29/did_larry_ellison_fly_a_plane_under_the_golden_gate_bridge_we_may_never.html)

Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Sept. 29 2014 3:48 PM

[Why the New York City Greenmarket Is Great for Small
Farms](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/29/new_york_city_greenmarket_small_farms_like_sycamore_farms_find_customers.html)

Harrison Jacobs

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 29 2014 3:06 PM

[Want to Be Stinking Rich? Major in
Economics.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/29/lifetime_earnings_by_college_major_why_economics_grads_make_bank.html)

Jordan Weissmann

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 26 2014 4:49 PM

[Watch the Whimsical Adventures of a Tube of Burt’s Bees Lip
Balm](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/26/burt_s_bees_commercial_a_natural_tv_ad_for_the_clorox_owned_company.html)

Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Business Insider Sept. 26 2014 1:24 PM

[Apple BendGate Truthers Smell a Media
Plot](http://www.slate.com/blogs/business_insider/2014/09/26/iphone_6_apple_bendgate_truthers_think_media_exaggerated_new_iphone_6_plus.html)

James Cook

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 26 2014 12:49 PM

[Americans Have No Idea How Bad Inequality Really
Is](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2014/09/americans_have_no_idea_how_bad_inequality_is_new_harvard_business_school.html)

Jordan Weissmann

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 26 2014 12:46 PM

[One of the Most Important and Eccentric Men in Finance Just Abandoned
His
Throne](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/26/bill_gross_steps_down_the_bond_king_leaves_pimco_for_janus_capital.html)

Alison Griswold

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Moneybox Sept. 25 2014 6:35 PM

[How the Rich Conquered the Economy, in One
Chart](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/25/how_the_rich_conquered_the_economy_in_one_chart.html)

Jordan Weissmann

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life.html) Life

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Gentleman Scholar Oct. 1 2014 4:55 PM

[Is It Acceptable to Choose Friends Over Family in a Wedding
Party?](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/gentleman_scholar/2014/10/wedding_etiquette_choosing_a_best_man_also_negroni_recipes_and_tie_width.html)

Troy Patterson

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/gentleman_scholar/2014/10/wedding_etiquette_choosing_a_best_man_also_negroni_recipes_and_tie_width.html)
Gentleman Scholar

Oct. 1 2014 4:55 PM Blood Before Bud? Must a gentleman’s brother always
be the best man at his wedding? Troy Patterson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Eye Oct. 1 2014 1:04 PM

[An Architectural Crusade Against the Tyranny of Straight
Lines](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/10/01/roman_mars_99_invisible_late_austrian_artist_and_designer_tausendsassa_friedensreich.html)

Luisa Beck and 99% Invisible

[An Architectural Crusade Against the Tyranny of Straight
Lines](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/10/01/roman_mars_99_invisible_late_austrian_artist_and_designer_tausendsassa_friedensreich.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Outward Oct. 1 2014 11:59 AM

[Why Are Lesbians So Affectionate in Public?
(Video.)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/10/01/ask_a_homo_why_are_lesbians_so_affectionate_in_public.html)

June Thomas

[Why Are Lesbians So Affectionate in Public?
(Video.)](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/10/01/ask_a_homo_why_are_lesbians_so_affectionate_in_public.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Vault Oct. 1 2014 10:49 AM

[James Meredith, Determined to Enroll at Ole Miss, Declares His Purpose
in a 1961
Letter](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/10/01/civil_rights_history_james_meredith_letter_to_the_department_of_justice.html)

Rebecca Onion

[James Meredith, Determined to Enroll at Ole Miss, Declares His Purpose
in a 1961
Letter](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/10/01/civil_rights_history_james_meredith_letter_to_the_department_of_justice.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Atlas Obscura Oct. 1 2014 10:32 AM

[Want to Stroll Down Hallways Stacked With Bodies? Go
Here.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/10/01/the_catacombs_of_capuchin_monastery_in_palermo_sicily.html)

Ella Morton

[Want to Stroll Down Hallways Stacked With Bodies? Go
Here.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/10/01/the_catacombs_of_capuchin_monastery_in_palermo_sicily.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Eye Oct. 1 2014 9:26 AM

[These Lego Masterpieces Capture the Fear and Humor of the “Dark”
Side](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/10/01/mike_doyle_s_book_beautiful_lego_2_dark_showcases_the_dark_side_of_the_world.html)

Kristin Hohenadel

[These Lego Masterpieces Capture the Fear and Humor of the “Dark”
Side](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_eye/2014/10/01/mike_doyle_s_book_beautiful_lego_2_dark_showcases_the_dark_side_of_the_world.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Quora Oct. 1 2014 9:13 AM

[What Is It Like to Be an
Egyptologist?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora/2014/10/01/what_is_it_like_to_be_an_egyptologist.html)

Quora Contributor

[What Is It Like to Be an
Egyptologist?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora/2014/10/01/what_is_it_like_to_be_an_egyptologist.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Gaming Sept. 30 2014 7:35 PM

[Major Scrabble Brouhaha: Can You Copyright a List of
Words?](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/gaming/2014/09/major_scrabble_brouhaha_can_you_copyright_a_list_of_words.html)

Stefan Fatsis

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Education Sept. 30 2014 1:48 PM

[Some Great Advice for Florida State’s New Underqualified, Rich-Guy
President](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/education/2014/09/florida_state_university_president_john_thrasher_is_he_unqualified_for_his.html)

Rebecca Schuman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Lexicon Valley Sept. 30 2014 1:23 PM

[What Can Linguistics Tell Us About Writing Better? An Interview with
Steven
Pinker.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley/2014/09/30/interview_steven_pinker_on_the_sense_of_style_and_what_linguistics_and_cognitive.html)

Gretchen McCulloch

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The Vault Sept. 30 2014 11:51 AM

[Thomas Jefferson’s 1769 Newspaper Ad Seeking a Fugitive
Slave](http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_vault/2014/09/30/thomas_jefferson_slavery_history_his_newspaper_ad_for_a_fugitive_from_monticello.html)

Kevin Waite

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Atlas Obscura Sept. 30 2014 10:10 AM

[A Lovable Murderer and Heroic Villain: The Story of Australia's Most
Iconic
Outlaw](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/09/30/ned_kelly_australian_bushranger_hero_villain_murderer.html)

Ella Morton

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Quora Sept. 30 2014 9:32 AM

[Why Are Mint Condition Comic Books So
Expensive?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/quora/2014/09/30/why_are_mint_condition_comic_books_so_expensive.html)

Quora Contributor

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Dear Prudence Sept. 30 2014 6:00 AM

[Help! My Boyfriend Demands That I Flash My Breasts at
Truckers.](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_my_boyfriend_insists_that_i_flash_my_breasts_at_truckers.html)

Emily Yoffe

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Dear Prudence Sept. 29 2014 3:10 PM

[Help! I Don’t Drink Alcohol. Why Do All My Friends and Colleagues Try
to Make
Me?](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/dear_prudence/2014/09/dear_prudence_i_don_t_drink_alcohol_but_everyone_tries_to_make_me.html)

Emily Yoffe

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Lexicon Valley Sept. 29 2014 1:34 PM

[Free "Tudoring" and a Moist Owlet: The 5 Different T Sounds in
English](http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley/2014/09/29/free_tudoring_moist_owlet_5_different_t_sounds_in_english_demonstrated_by.html)

Gretchen McCulloch

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Outward Sept. 29 2014 1:29 PM

[*Pride:*A Heartbreaking British Comedy About the Time Gays and Miners
Worked
Together**](http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2014/09/29/pride_about_london_gays_helping_welsh_miners_in_the_1984_85_strike_reviewed.html)

June Thomas

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x.html) Double X

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Oct. 1 2014 5:11 PM

[Celebrity Feminist Identification Has Reached Peak
Meaninglessness](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/celebrity_feminists_karl_lagerfeld_and_emily_ratajkowski_make_feminism_fashionable.html)

Amanda Hess

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/celebrity_feminists_karl_lagerfeld_and_emily_ratajkowski_make_feminism_fashionable.html)

The XX Factor

Oct. 1 2014 5:11 PM Celebrity Feminist Identification Has Reached Peak
Meaninglessness Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Oct. 1 2014 4:58 PM

[The Religious Right Is Not Happy With
Republicans](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/at_the_values_voter_summit_the_religious_right_tried_to_keep_republicans.html)

Amanda Marcotte

[The Religious Right Is Not Happy With
Republicans](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/at_the_values_voter_summit_the_religious_right_tried_to_keep_republicans.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Oct. 1 2014 4:05 PM

[This Is the Most Amazing Political Ad of the
Season](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/say_yes_to_the_candidate_rick_scott_ad_knows_women_only_understand_wedding.html)

Amanda Marcotte

[This Is the Most Amazing Political Ad of the
Season](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/say_yes_to_the_candidate_rick_scott_ad_knows_women_only_understand_wedding.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Oct. 1 2014 2:08 PM

[CBS Names Its All-Female Sports Talk Show *We Need to Talk*. Terrible
Name, Good
Show.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/we_need_to_talk_cbs_sports_network_s_new_talk_show_reviewed.html)

Amanda Hess

[CBS Names Its All-Female Sports Talk Show *We Need to Talk*. Terrible
Name, Good
Show.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/we_need_to_talk_cbs_sports_network_s_new_talk_show_reviewed.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Oct. 1 2014 1:01 PM

[Can Activists Save This Iranian Woman Sentenced to Death for Killing
Her Alleged
Rapist?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/reyhaneh_jabbari_iran_delays_her_execution_amid_social_media_outcry.html)

Filipa Ioannou

[Can Activists Save This Iranian Woman Sentenced to Death for Killing
Her Alleged
Rapist?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/reyhaneh_jabbari_iran_delays_her_execution_amid_social_media_outcry.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 30 2014 12:34 PM

[Parents, Get Your Teenage Daughters the
IUD](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/30/the_american_academy_of_pediatrics_recommends_the_iud_for_teenagers.html)

Amanda Marcotte

[Parents, Get Your Teenage Daughters the
IUD](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/30/the_american_academy_of_pediatrics_recommends_the_iud_for_teenagers.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Doublex Sept. 29 2014 11:43 PM

[I Read Lena Dunham’s New Book. I Learned Nothing About Lena
Dunham.](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/lena_dunham_s_not_that_kind_of_girl_reviewed.html)

Katy Waldman

[I Read Lena Dunham’s New Book. I Learned Nothing About Lena
Dunham.](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/lena_dunham_s_not_that_kind_of_girl_reviewed.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 29 2014 9:39 PM

[Rehtaeh Parsons Was the Most Famous Victim in Canada. Now, Journalists
Can’t Even Say Her
Name.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/29/rehtaeh_parsons_canadian_journalists_can_t_print_her_name_as_a_suspect_pleads.html)

Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 29 2014 1:52 PM

[Do Not Fear California’s New Affirmative Consent
Law](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/29/affirmative_consent_in_california_gov_jerry_brown_signs_the_yes_means_yes.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Doublex Sept. 29 2014 1:49 PM

[What a Juicy New Book About Diane Sawyer and Katie Couric Can’t Tell Us
About the TV News
Business](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/sheila_weller_s_news_sorority_about_diane_sawyer_katie_couric_and_christiane.html)

Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 29 2014 11:38 AM

[Sometimes I Say I'm Married, Sometimes I Pretend I'm
Not](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/29/marriage_politics_why_calling_your_husband_husband_sometimes_feels_wrong.html)

Nona Willis Aronowitz

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 29 2014 9:17 AM

[This New Consent App Is Even Scarier Than Talking About
Sex](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/29/good2go_a_new_app_for_consenting_to_sex.html)

Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 26 2014 3:29 PM

[Hospitals Are Billing Rape Victims Thousands of Dollars for
Exams](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/26/rape_kit_costs_louisiana_rape_victims_are_paying_thousands_of_dollars.html)

Amanda Hess

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 26 2014 1:24 PM

[Why the Pot-Smoking Gender Gap
Matters](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/26/minor_gender_gaps_matter_from_pot_smoking_to_bike_riding_to_soul_cycle.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 25 2014 3:25 PM

[Pennsylvania Republicans Compare a Pro-Choice Democrat to Kermit
Gosnell](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/25/pennsylvania_governor_race_republicans_support_tom_corbett_by_linking_democratic.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

The XX Factor Sept. 25 2014 11:22 AM

[Fox Host Reaction to Female Fighter Pilot: “Boobs on the
Ground”](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/25/uae_fighter_pilot_mariam_al_mansouri_fox_news_hosts_call_her_boobs_on_the.html)

Amanda Marcotte

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Doublex Sept. 24 2014 5:37 PM

[The Catholic Church Makes Life Impossible for Infertile
Women](http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2014/09/the_catholic_church_and_infertility_emily_herx_s_lawsuit_describes_the_problem.html)

Joel Baden and Candida Moss

[](/plus/home?wpisrc=sp_all_native-by-section) Slate Plus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Oct. 1 2014 3:24 PM

[Photo Highlights From ***Slate***’s Annual
Retreat](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus/behind_the_scenes/2014/10/behind_the_scenes_at_slate_s_annual_retreat.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus/behind_the_scenes/2014/10/behind_the_scenes_at_slate_s_annual_retreat.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)
Behind the Scenes

Oct. 1 2014 3:24 PM Revelry (and Business) at Mohonk Photos and
highlights from ***Slate***’s annual retreat.

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Political Gabfest Oct. 1 2014 1:53 PM

[Get Tickets to***Slate***’s Superfest East in New
York](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gabfest/2014/10/slate_s_superfest_east_join_yoffe_bazelon_pesca_and_others_nov_17_in_brooklyn.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

[Get Tickets to***Slate***’s Superfest East in New
York](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/gabfest/2014/10/slate_s_superfest_east_join_yoffe_bazelon_pesca_and_others_nov_17_in_brooklyn.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Oct. 1 2014 10:54 AM

[When an Advice Columnist’s Inbox Is Filled With Cries of Existential
Despair](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/behind_the_scenes/2014/10/troy_patterson_slate_s_gentleman_scholar_dishes_about_his_shopping_habits.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Jennifer Lai and Troy Patterson

[When an Advice Columnist’s Inbox Is Filled With Cries of Existential
Despair](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/behind_the_scenes/2014/10/troy_patterson_slate_s_gentleman_scholar_dishes_about_his_shopping_habits.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Sept. 30 2014 3:21 PM

[Five Questions With Business and Economics Writer Jordan
Weissmann](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/jordan_weissmann_getting_to_know_slate_s_senior_business_and_economics_correspondent.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Jordan Weissmann

[Five Questions With Business and Economics Writer Jordan
Weissmann](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/jordan_weissmann_getting_to_know_slate_s_senior_business_and_economics_correspondent.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Picks Sept. 30 2014 11:42 AM

[***Slate***Staff Pick****the Best Songs From
September](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_music_september_spotify_playlist_for_slate_plus_members.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Aisha Harris, Miriam Krule, Dee Lockett, J. Bryan Lowder, Ben
Mathis-Lilley, and Forrest Wickman

[***Slate***Staff Pick****the Best Songs From
September](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_music_september_spotify_playlist_for_slate_plus_members.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Sept. 30 2014 10:59 AM

[How Should You Order Chinese Food? A ***Slate***Writer Explains the
Story Behind Her
Story.](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/chinese_restaurant_ordering_tips_boer_deng_tells_us_why_she_s_passionate.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Boer Deng

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

History Sept. 29 2014 11:18 AM

[John Swansburg and His Editor on the Myth of the Self-Made Man
(Audio)](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/history/2014/09/the_history_of_the_self_made_man_john_swansburg_and_editor_jessica_winter.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

John Swansburg and Jessica Winter

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

History Sept. 29 2014 11:18 AM

[Listen to an Audio Version of John Swansburg’s Self-Made Man
Story](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/history/2014/09/slate_self_made_man_story_audio_version_read_by_author_john_swansburg.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

John Swansburg

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behind the Scenes Sept. 29 2014 11:17 AM

[The Fathers and Sons Behind My Essay About the American Mythology of
the Self-Made
Man](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/behind_the_scenes/2014/09/the_self_made_man_in_america_the_tension_between_fathers_and_sons.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

John Swansburg

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Fare Sept. 29 2014 8:45 AM

[Is ***Slate*** Too Liberal? Too Predictable? Our Members Weigh
In.](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus/slate_fare/2014/09/is_slate_magazine_too_liberal_or_conservative_what_members_said_about_the.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Jessica Winter

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Tv Club Sept. 29 2014 8:30 AM

[*Doctor Who* Podcast:****Phil Plait and Laura Helmuth Recap Episode
6](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/tv_club/2014/08/slate_s_doctor_who_podcast_recap_and_spoiler_special.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Phil Plait, Laura Helmuth, Heidi Strom Moon, Mac Rogers, and June Thomas

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Picks Sept. 26 2014 10:41 AM

[Jamelle Bouie on What You Should Read From ***Slate*** This
Week](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_s_weekly_roundup_what_jamelle_bouie_read_about_internet_misogyny_ebola.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Jamelle Bouie

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Political Gabfest Sept. 23 2014 3:04 PM

[Tickets to Chicago Gabfest: First Dibs for S+
Members](http://www.slate.com/articles/slate_plus/gabfest/2014/09/chicago_gabfest_early_access_tickets_for_slate_plus_members.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Sept. 22 2014 8:08 AM

[Mike Vuolo Reads “Why Is So Much Honey *Clover*
Honey?”](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/science/2014/09/slate_out_loud_mike_vuolo_reads_why_is_so_much_honey_clover_honey_audio.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Mike Vuolo

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Slate Picks Sept. 19 2014 12:00 PM

[What Should I Read From ***Slate***This Week? The Slatest Editor Shares
His
Picks.](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/slate_picks/2014/09/slate_s_weekly_roundup_what_ben_mathis_lilley_read_about_this_week_at_the.html?wpsrc=sp_all_native_by-section)

Ben Mathis-Lilley

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts.html) Arts

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Oct. 1 2014 3:02 PM

[The Week’s Best TV News Is That *You’re the Worst* Is Getting a Second
Season](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/you_re_the_worst_renewed_fx_show_the_best_of_the_summer_gets_a_season_2.html)

A.J. McCarthy

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/you_re_the_worst_renewed_fx_show_the_best_of_the_summer_gets_a_season_2.html)
Brow Beat

Oct. 1 2014 3:02 PM The Best Show of the Summer Is Getting a Second
Season A.J. McCarthy

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Oct. 1 2014 2:24 PM

[The New *Interstellar*Trailer Is the Most Exciting
Yet](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/interstellar_trailer_3_is_the_most_exciting_and_most_spoiler_y_yet_video.html)

Forrest Wickman

[The New *Interstellar*Trailer Is the Most Exciting
Yet](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/interstellar_trailer_3_is_the_most_exciting_and_most_spoiler_y_yet_video.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Oct. 1 2014 2:15 PM

[This Episode of *Gilmore Girls* Will Convince You to Watch the Whole
Series](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2013/06/11/gilmore_girls_best_episode_is_they_shoot_gilmores_don_t_they.html)

Heather Brady

[This Episode of *Gilmore Girls* Will Convince You to Watch the Whole
Series](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2013/06/11/gilmore_girls_best_episode_is_they_shoot_gilmores_don_t_they.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Oct. 1 2014 1:13 PM

[The Essence of Gender Roles in Action Movies, in One
Supercut](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/_let_her_go_supercut_distills_the_essence_of_gender_roles_in_action_movies.html)

Forrest Wickman

[The Essence of Gender Roles in Action Movies, in One
Supercut](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/_let_her_go_supercut_distills_the_essence_of_gender_roles_in_action_movies.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behold Oct. 1 2014 1:04 PM

[The Many Faces of
Texas](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/10/01/michael_o_brien_photographs_texans_in_his_book_the_face_of_texas.html)

Jordan G. Teicher

[The Many Faces of
Texas](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/10/01/michael_o_brien_photographs_texans_in_his_book_the_face_of_texas.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Oct. 1 2014 12:26 PM

[Still Don’t Get Leonard Cohen? Here’s a 10-Song
Primer.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/leonard_cohen_s_best_songs_for_newcomers.html)

Carl Wilson

[Still Don’t Get Leonard Cohen? Here’s a 10-Song
Primer.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/leonard_cohen_s_best_songs_for_newcomers.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Music Oct. 1 2014 12:21 PM

[Three New Albums Show How Even an Old Hipster Can Age
Gracefully](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2014/10/leonard_cohen_robert_plant_and_loudon_wainwright_iii_s_new_albums_reviewed.html)

Carl Wilson

[Three New Albums Show How Even an Old Hipster Can Age
Gracefully](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2014/10/leonard_cohen_robert_plant_and_loudon_wainwright_iii_s_new_albums_reviewed.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Television Oct. 1 2014 12:19 PM

[*Homeland* Might Be Good Again.
Really.](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/television/2014/10/homeland_season_4_review_showtime_series_premiering_sunday_is_good_again.html)

Willa Paskin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Oct. 1 2014 10:44 AM

[Everyone’s Favorite *Bob’s Burgers*Character Gets an Awesome
Remix](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/tina_belcher_remix_eclectic_method_pays_tribute_to_a_bobs_burgers_favorite.html)

Aisha Harris

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Oct. 1 2014 8:46 AM

[Why I Dressed Like a Hitchcock Heroine When I Was Sentenced to
Prison](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/10/01/piper_kerman_on_her_prison_sentencing_and_the_checked_50s_suit_she_wore.html)

Piper Kerman and Emily Spivack

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 30 2014 8:54 PM

[Bette Davis Talks Gender Roles in This Delightful, Animated Interview
From
1963](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/30/bette_davis_blank_on_blank_interview_the_actress_talks_gender_roles_in_1963.html)

Sharan Shetty

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 30 2014 4:45 PM

[No Director Has Ever Done Work Quite Like Steven Soderbergh’s on *The
Knick*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/30/the_knick_appreciating_steven_soderbergh_s_direction_of_the_medical_period.html)

Matt Zoller Seitz

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 30 2014 3:59 PM

[The Trailer for *Taken 3* Is Here, and Guess Who’s on His Phone
Again](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/30/taken_3_trailer_tak3n_has_the_bad_guys_after_liam_neeson_s_family_again.html)

Dee Lockett

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 30 2014 2:56 PM

[What Was Changed and What Was Omitted in David Fincher’s *Gone
Girl*Adaptation](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/30/gone_girl_movie_vs_the_book_a_comparison_of_major_plot_differences_in_david.html)

Aisha Harris

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 30 2014 12:42 PM

[Did Your Homemade Mayonnaise Curdle? Here’s How to Save
It.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/30/saving_broken_mayonnaise_a_recipe_for_emulsifying_curdled_oil_and_eggs_video.html)

L.V. Anderson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Behold Sept. 30 2014 12:10 PM

[Violence, Love, and Hope: Growing Up in the Bronx in the
1980s](http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2014/09/30/stephen_shames_photographs_the_bronx_in_his_book_bronx_boys.html)

Jordan G. Teicher

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Brow Beat Sept. 30 2014 12:04 PM

[I First Wore a Dress to Impersonate Ayn Rand. It Was
Liberating.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/30/ayn_rand_dress_john_hodgman_on_the_blue_number_he_uses_to_impersonate_the.html)

John Hodgman and Emily Spivack

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology.html) Technology

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 4:46 PM

[Ebola Is No Measles. That’s a Good
Thing.](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/ebola_transmission_rate_the_virus_doesn_t_spread_as_quickly_as_measles_and.html)

Gerardo Chowell-Puente

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/ebola_transmission_rate_the_virus_doesn_t_spread_as_quickly_as_measles_and.html)
Future Tense

Oct. 1 2014 4:46 PM Ebola Is No Measles. That’s a Good Thing. Comparing
this virus to scourges of the past gives us hope that we can slow it
down. Gerardo Chowell-Puente

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 4:44 PM

[Law Enforcement Has Declared War on Encryption It Can’t
Break](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/law_enforcement_has_declared_war_on_encryption_it_can_t_break.html)

Dan Gillmor

[Law Enforcement Has Declared War on Encryption It Can’t
Break](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/law_enforcement_has_declared_war_on_encryption_it_can_t_break.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 4:26 PM

[How to Measure the Value of Your Personal Data in Cookies: A
***Slate***Guide](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/artist_risa_puno_asks_if_you_d_trade_your_privacy_for_a_cookie_slate_helps.html)

Katy Waldman

[How to Measure the Value of Your Personal Data in Cookies: A
***Slate***Guide](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/artist_risa_puno_asks_if_you_d_trade_your_privacy_for_a_cookie_slate_helps.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 3:01 PM

[Netizen Report: Hong Kong Protests Trigger Surveillance and Social
Media
Censorship](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/netizen_report_hong_kong_protests_trigger_surveillance_and_social_media.html)

[Netizen Report: Hong Kong Protests Trigger Surveillance and Social
Media
Censorship](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/netizen_report_hong_kong_protests_trigger_surveillance_and_social_media.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 2:26 PM

[Mourn Dead Apple Products Like the iPod Classic at Their Virtual
Graveyard](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/mourn_discontinued_apple_products_like_the_ipod_classic_newton_ibook.html)

Chris Kirk

[Mourn Dead Apple Products Like the iPod Classic at Their Virtual
Graveyard](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/mourn_discontinued_apple_products_like_the_ipod_classic_newton_ibook.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 1:25 PM

[Japanese Cheerleader Robots Balance and Roll Around on
Balls](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/japanese_manufacturer_murata_manufacturing_co_built_cheerleader_robots_to.html)

Lily Hay Newman

[Japanese Cheerleader Robots Balance and Roll Around on
Balls](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/japanese_manufacturer_murata_manufacturing_co_built_cheerleader_robots_to.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 11:48 AM

[Watch a Crowd Go Wild When Steve Jobs Moves a Laptop in This 1999
Demonstration of
WiFi](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/video_steve_jobs_demos_wifi_to_crowd_in_1999_ibook_event.html)

Chris Kirk

[Watch a Crowd Go Wild When Steve Jobs Moves a Laptop in This 1999
Demonstration of
WiFi](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/video_steve_jobs_demos_wifi_to_crowd_in_1999_ibook_event.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 11:41 AM

[Study: Narcissists Watch More Porn
Online](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/internet_psychology_study_says_narcissists_watch_more_porn_online.html)

Jennifer Golbeck

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 11:37 AM

[Virginia Students Make Apps to Help Parents Choose the Best
Schools](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/10/apps4va_education_technology_data_creates_apps_to_help_learning.html)

Annie Murphy Paul

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Oct. 1 2014 10:27 AM

[3,000 French Scientists Are Marching to Demand More Research
Funding](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/scientific_funding_3_000_french_scientists_stage_protest_march.html)

Boer Deng

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 30 2014 7:00 PM

[There’s Going to Be a Live-Action Tetris Movie for Some
Reason](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/30/threshold_entertainment_is_making_a_tetris_movie.html)

Lily Hay Newman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 30 2014 6:43 PM

[Windows 8 Was So Bad That Microsoft Is Skipping Straight to Windows
10](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/30/microsoft_windows_10_operating_system_windows_8_was_so_bad_it_s_skipping.html)

Will Oremus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 30 2014 5:47 PM

[California Governor Vetoes Bill Requiring Warrant for Police
Surveillance
Drones](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/30/california_governor_jerry_brown_vetoes_drone_surveillance_law_enforcement.html)

Lily Hay Newman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 30 2014 4:59 PM

[China’s Not the Problem With Carbon Emissions. We
Are.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/30/china_s_not_the_problem_with_carbon_emissions_we_are.html)

Eric Holthaus

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 30 2014 2:38 PM

[Scientists Use Electrical Impulses to Help Paralyzed Rats Walk
Again](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/30/new_research_cures_spinal_cord_injury_paralysis_in_rats_using_drugs_and.html)

Boer Deng

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 30 2014 11:55 AM

[The Justice Department Is Cracking Down on Sales of Spyware Used in
Stalking](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/30/justice_department_indicted_a_pakistani_man_for_selling_stealthgenie_spyware.html)

Lily Hay Newman

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Future Tense Sept. 30 2014 7:36 AM

[What *Battlestar Galactica* Can Teach Us About Prisoners of
War](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/09/battlestar_galactica_and_guant_namo_what_sci_fi_teaches_us_about_prisoners.html)

Joelle Renstrom

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science.html) Health &
Science

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Oct. 1 2014 4:03 PM

[Does the Mysterious Earth “Hum” Really Exist? Sort
of.](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/10/earth_hum_explained_taos_kokomo_u_k_hums_may_be_delusion_but_one_does_exist.html)

Paca Thomas

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/10/earth_hum_explained_taos_kokomo_u_k_hums_may_be_delusion_but_one_does_exist.html)
Science

Oct. 1 2014 4:03 PM Does the Earth Really Have a “Hum”? Yes, but
probably not the one you’re thinking. Paca Thomas

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Oct. 1 2014 2:36 PM

[The *Wall Street Journal* Needed a Fresh Face for Climate Inaction. It
Found a
Doozy.](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/10/the_wall_street_journal_and_steve_koonin_the_new_face_of_climate_change.html)

Raymond T. Pierrehumbert

[The *Wall Street Journal* Needed a Fresh Face for Climate Inaction. It
Found a
Doozy.](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/10/the_wall_street_journal_and_steve_koonin_the_new_face_of_climate_change.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Oct. 1 2014 12:01 PM

[Rocky Mountain
Snow](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/10/01/rocky_snow_photo_of_mountain_snow_in_september_2014.html)

Phil Plait

[Rocky Mountain
Snow](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/10/01/rocky_snow_photo_of_mountain_snow_in_september_2014.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Oct. 1 2014 7:30 AM

[How Many Moons Does Earth Have? One More, Now.
Kinda.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/10/01/resonant_asteroid_2014_ol339_has_an_earth_like_orbit.html)

Phil Plait

[How Many Moons Does Earth Have? One More, Now.
Kinda.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/10/01/resonant_asteroid_2014_ol339_has_an_earth_like_orbit.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Medical Examiner Sept. 30 2014 11:51 PM

[The Manipulative, Misleading Marketing Campaign to Get Women to Freeze
Their
Eggs](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/egg_freezing_marketing_campaigns_lie_about_success_rates_of_this_fertility.html)

Robin Marantz Henig

[The Manipulative, Misleading Marketing Campaign to Get Women to Freeze
Their
Eggs](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/egg_freezing_marketing_campaigns_lie_about_success_rates_of_this_fertility.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Medical Examiner Sept. 30 2014 6:44 PM

[How the United States Contains Deadly Hemorrhagic Fevers Like
Ebola](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/08/ebola_in_united_states_research_on_deadly_hemorrhagic_fevers_lassa_marburg.html)

Tara C. Smith

[How the United States Contains Deadly Hemorrhagic Fevers Like
Ebola](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/08/ebola_in_united_states_research_on_deadly_hemorrhagic_fevers_lassa_marburg.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 30 2014 7:30 AM

[Something Vast and Cold Lurks Beneath the Surface of Titan’s
Lakes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/30/titan_lakes_changing_features_are_a_mystery.html)

Phil Plait

[Something Vast and Cold Lurks Beneath the Surface of Titan’s
Lakes](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/30/titan_lakes_changing_features_are_a_mystery.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Medical Examiner Sept. 29 2014 11:32 PM

[Is Sluggish Cognitive Tempo a Disease? Or Disease
Mongering?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2014/09/sluggish_cognitive_tempo_is_it_a_disease_independent_of_adhd_and_can_drugs.html)

Peter Aldhous

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 29 2014 12:01 PM

[Your MOM Goes to
Mars](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/29/mom_goes_to_mars_full_disk_view_of_the_red_planet.html)

Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 29 2014 8:00 AM

[Where Will We Find Extraterrestrial Life
First?](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/29/exobiology_where_will_we_find_life_first.html)

Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Sept. 28 2014 7:45 PM

[The 10,000 Hour Rule Is Wrong and Perpetuates a Cruel
Myth](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html)

David Z. Hambrick, Fernanda Ferreira, and John M. Henderson

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

New Scientist Sept. 28 2014 7:00 AM

[What Did Ancient Mesopotamian Music Sound
Like?](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/new_scientist/2014/09/babylonian_music_recreated_instruments_poetry_and_songs_from_ancient_mesopotamia.html)

Mick Hamer

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 28 2014 7:00 AM

[Japanese Volcano Eruption Caught on Video … VERY Up Close and
Personal](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/28/mount_ontake_video_of_a_massive_eruption_by_hikers_on_the_ground.html)

Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Bad Astronomy Sept. 27 2014 7:30 AM

[A Night of Science and
Silliness](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/09/27/bay_area_science_festival_quiz_o_tron_and_bah_fest.html)

Phil Plait

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

New Scientist Sept. 27 2014 7:00 AM

[The Woman Who Saved Mongolia’s
Dinosaurs](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/new_scientist/2014/09/mongolia_dinosaur_fossils_oyungerel_tsevedvamba_fights_poaching_of_stolen.html)

Jeff Hecht

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Science Sept. 26 2014 9:33 AM

[Research Labs and Animal Rights Advocates Fight for Custody of Retired
Chimps](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/research_on_chimpanzees_should_retired_government_chimps_go_to_sanctuaries.html)

Keith O’Brien

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Jurisprudence Sept. 26 2014 9:19 AM

[Which State’s Gay Marriage Case Should the Supreme Court Take? Glamour,
Scope, and
Baggage.](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/jurisprudence/2014/09/gay_marriage_at_the_supreme_court_comparing_utah_virginia_indiana_wisconsin.html)

Dahlia Lithwick and Mark Joseph Stern

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports.html) Sports

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Oct. 1 2014 5:19 PM

[Exactly How Bad Was the Royals’ Bunt-All-the-Time Strategy in the AL
Wild-Card
Game?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/10/american_league_wild_card_game_how_bad_was_the_kansas_city_royals_bunt_all.html)

Ben Blatt

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/10/american_league_wild_card_game_how_bad_was_the_kansas_city_royals_bunt_all.html)
Sports Nut

Oct. 1 2014 5:19 PM Bunt-a-Palooza! How bad was the Kansas City Royals’
bunt-all-the-time strategy in the American League wild-card game? Ben
Blatt

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 30 2014 5:54 PM

[Michigan’s Obsession With Football “Toughness” Needs to Go—Starting
With Coach
Hoke](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/brady_hoke_michigan_man_it_s_time_for_michigan_to_fire_its_toughness_obsessed.html)

Chris Laskowski

[Michigan’s Obsession With Football “Toughness” Needs to Go—Starting
With Coach
Hoke](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/brady_hoke_michigan_man_it_s_time_for_michigan_to_fire_its_toughness_obsessed.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 28 2014 8:30 PM

[Could the NFL Actually Be a Boon to Public
Health?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/nfl_players_life_spans_and_domestic_violence_rates_could_pro_football_actually.html)

Daniel Engber

[Could the NFL Actually Be a Boon to Public
Health?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/nfl_players_life_spans_and_domestic_violence_rates_could_pro_football_actually.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 25 2014 9:48 PM

[The Real Reason Bill Simmons Got
Suspended](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/bill_simmons_suspended_yes_he_called_roger_goodell_a_liar_but_here_s_the.html)

Josh Levin

[The Real Reason Bill Simmons Got
Suspended](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/bill_simmons_suspended_yes_he_called_roger_goodell_a_liar_but_here_s_the.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 25 2014 1:23 PM

[LSU Football Coach Les Miles Explains Advanced Baseball Stats, for Some
Reason](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/les_miles_baseball_stats_the_lsu_football_coach_explains_sabermetrics_for.html)

Josh Levin

[LSU Football Coach Les Miles Explains Advanced Baseball Stats, for Some
Reason](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/les_miles_baseball_stats_the_lsu_football_coach_explains_sabermetrics_for.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 23 2014 7:27 PM

[The NFL Has No Business Punishing Players for Off-Field Conduct. Leave
That to the
Teams.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/nfl_personal_conduct_policy_the_commissioner_has_no_business_punishing_anyone.html)

Josh Levin

[The NFL Has No Business Punishing Players for Off-Field Conduct. Leave
That to the
Teams.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/nfl_personal_conduct_policy_the_commissioner_has_no_business_punishing_anyone.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 18 2014 11:42 AM

[One of the Most Amazing Feats in Chess History Just Happened, and No
One
Noticed](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)

Seth Stevenson

[One of the Most Amazing Feats in Chess History Just Happened, and No
One
Noticed](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sinquefield_cup_one_of_the_most_amazing_feats_in_chess_history_just_happened.html)

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 17 2014 3:51 PM

[How Big of a Jerk Is NFL Commissioner Roger
Goodell?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_nfl_jerk_watch_how_much_should_you_loathe_the_pro_football.html)

Jeremy Stahl

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 15 2014 9:05 PM

[Roger Goodell and the NFL Thought They Had the Press Under Control. Not
Any
More.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/roger_goodell_and_the_nfl_thought_they_had_the_press_under_control_not_any.html)

Stefan Fatsis

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 15 2014 8:41 PM

[Adrian Peterson Doesn’t Even Deserve to Be on Your Fantasy Team. You
Should Release
Him.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/adrian_peterson_child_abuse_allegations_why_fantasy_owners_should_release.html)

A.J. McCarthy

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 15 2014 5:37 PM

[What Stephen Colbert Is to Dumb Politicians, PFTCommenter Is to the
Dumb
NFL](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pftcommenter_what_stephen_colbert_is_to_dumb_infuriating_politicians_this.html)

Ben Mathis-Lilley

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 12 2014 4:36 PM

[Pete Carroll and Jim Harbaugh Exemplify the NFL’s Domestic Violence
Hypocrisy](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/pete_carroll_and_jim_harbaugh_on_ray_rice_the_seahawks_and_49ers_coaches.html)

Jeremy Stahl

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 11 2014 7:29 PM

[What Happens When an NFL Player Is Accused of Beating Up His Wife and
There’s No
Video](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/terrell_suggs_domestic_violence_like_his_teammate_ray_rice_the_ravens_linebacker.html)

Josh Levin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 10 2014 6:36 PM

[An AP Report Is Not Enough—We Need Video Proof That an NFL Executive
Watched the Ray Rice
Video](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/ray_rice_video_an_ap_report_is_not_enough_we_need_video_proof_of_an_nfl.html)

Josh Levin

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 9 2014 9:24 PM

[It's Not Just the Hawks. Other Atlanta Sports Teams Seem to Prefer
Their White Fans,
Too.](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/hawks_owner_bruce_levenson_s_email_reveals_how_atlanta_s_sports_franchises.html)

Robert Weintraub

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 9 2014 12:15 PM

[Which Professional Athlete Earned the Most Frequent-Flyer Miles in His
Career?](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/sports_travel_which_team_holds_the_single_season_frequent_flyer_record.html)

Ben Blatt

![image](/etc/designs/slate/images/transparent.7f431be1.png)

Sports Nut Sept. 5 2014 3:02 PM

[Teenage Mutant Ninja Bortles, and 2014’s Other Most Popular Fantasy
Football Team
Names](http://www.slate.com/articles/sports/sports_nut/2014/09/fantasy_football_team_names_turn_down_for_watt_stafford_infection_and_2014.html)

Ben Blatt

[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[Most Read](#)

-   [1. How Many Moons Does Earth Have? One More, Now.
    Kinda.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2014/10/01/resonant_asteroid_2014_ol339_has_an_earth_like_orbit.html)
-   [2. The 10,000 Hour Rule Is Wrong and Perpetuates a Cruel
    Myth](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.html)
-   [3. The Greatest Job Perk You’ve Never Heard Of:
    “Pre-cation”](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/building_a_better_workplace/2014/09/precation_perks_companies_offer_employees_vacation_before_they_start.html)
-   [4. The Religious Right Is Not Happy With
    Republicans](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/10/01/at_the_values_voter_summit_the_religious_right_tried_to_keep_republicans.html)
-   [5. Is It Acceptable to Choose Friends Over Family in a Wedding
    Party?](http://www.slate.com/articles/life/gentleman_scholar/2014/10/wedding_etiquette_choosing_a_best_man_also_negroni_recipes_and_tie_width.html)

Most Shared

-   [1. The Greatest Job Perk You’ve Never Heard Of:
    “Pre-cation”](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/building_a_better_workplace/2014/09/precation_perks_companies_offer_employees_vacation_before_they_start.html)
-   [2. Antarctic Ice Melt Causes Small Shift in
    Gravity](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/09/29/antarctic_ice_melt_causes_small_shift_in_gravity.html)
-   [3. Rehtaeh Parsons Was the Most Famous Victim in Canada. Now,
    Journalists Can’t Even Say Her
    Name.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/29/rehtaeh_parsons_canadian_journalists_can_t_print_her_name_as_a_suspect_pleads.html)
-   [4. Want to Be Stinking Rich? Major in
    Economics.](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/09/29/lifetime_earnings_by_college_major_why_economics_grads_make_bank.html)
-   [5. This New Consent App Is Even Scarier Than Talking About
    Sex](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/09/29/good2go_a_new_app_for_consenting_to_sex.html)

![image](http://www.slate.com/content/dam/slate/articles/video/2014/TNC141001_seamonkeys_1280.jpg.CROP.hd-large.jpg)
[Amazing Live
Sea-Monkeys](http://www.slate.com/articles/video/video/2014/10/sea_monkey_laser_study_small_ocean_creatures_can_move_currents_video.html?wpisrc=seg_video)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/09/republicans_attacking_democrats_on_obama_s_unpopular_foreign_policy_how.html)Politics

Sept. 30 2014 6:59 PMThe Democrats’ War at HomeCan the president’s party
defend itself from the president’s foreign policy blunders?[John
Dickerson](http://www.slate.com/authors.john_dickerson.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2014/10/leonard_cohen_robert_plant_and_loudon_wainwright_iii_s_new_albums_reviewed.html)Music

Oct. 1 2014 12:21 PMHow Even an Old Hipster Can Age GracefullyOn their
new albums, Leonard Cohen, Robert Plant, and Loudon Wainwright III show
three ways.[Carl Wilson](http://www.slate.com/authors.carl_wilson.html)

[](http://www.slate.com/blogs/atlas_obscura/2014/10/01/the_catacombs_of_capuchin_monastery_in_palermo_sicily.html)Atlas
Obscura

Oct. 1 2014 10:32 AMWant to Stroll Down Hallways Stacked With Bodies? Go
Here.[Ella Morton](http://www.slate.com/authors.ella_morton.html)

FOLLOW SLATE
[![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/social/yellow-twitterNew.821dc365.png)](https://twitter.com/slate)
[![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/social/yellow-facebookNew.74981e6f.png)](http://www.facebook.com/Slate)

SLATE ON
[IPAD](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/slate-magazine/id384914589?mt=8)
[IPHONE](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/slate-com/id357555242?mt=8)
[ANDROID](https://market.android.com/details?id=com.wapo.slate.android)
[KINDLE](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000IOMTC0?ie=UTF8&tag=slatmaga-20&link_code=as3&camp=211189&creative=373489&creativeASIN=B000IOMTC0/)

[REPRINTS](http://www.slatereprints.com) [ADVERTISE WITH
US](http://innovate.slate.com/)

-   [ABOUT
    US](/articles/news_and_politics/slate_fare/2006/08/about_us.html)
-   [CONTACT
    US](/articles/briefing/contact_us/2006/08/whereto_find_slate_staff.html)
-   [WORK WITH
    US](/articles/news_and_politics/slate_fare/2008/04/a_job_for_you_at_slate.html)

-   [USER
    AGREEMENT](/articles/briefing/slate_user_agreement_and_privacy_policy/2012/12/slate_s_terms_of_service.html)
-   [PRIVACY
    POLICY](/articles/briefing/slate_user_agreement_and_privacy_policy/2012/12/slate_s_privacy_policy.html)
-   [FAQ](/articles/briefing/slate_fare/2011/12/commenting_on_slate_frequently_asked_questions.html)

-   [FEEDBACK](mailto:feedback@slate.com)
-   [CORRECTIONS](/articles/news_and_politics/corrections.html)

-   [![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/the-slate-group-logo.12cbe5ac.png)](http://www.slate.com)
-   [![image](//slate-static-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/etc/designs/slate/images/the-root-logo.74009c0a.png)](http://www.theroot.com)
-   Slate is published by The Slate Group, a Graham Holdings Company.
    All contents © 2014 The Slate Group LLC. All rights reserved.

[](#)

[Slate](/)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[Slate](/) [](#) [](#) [](#)

[Sign In](#) [Sign Up](#)

[](#) [](#) [](#comments)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/09/malcolm_gladwell_s_10_000_hour_rule_for_deliberate_practice_is_wrong_genes.single.html
