[Blog](/blog/) ▪ [Software](https://github.com/malyn) ▪ [About](/about/)

* * * * *

[Michael Alyn Miller](/)

* * * * *

[Vim + tmux + Clojure](/blog/2013/02/27/vim-tmux-clojure/)
==========================================================

February 27, 2013

* * * * *

There are a number of things that excite me about Clojure, but as
someone that [still uses
Forth](http://www.strangegizmo.com/products/mforth/), the REPL was the
thing that immediately attracted me to the language. The challenge for
me as a Vim user was getting that REPL working in an environment that I
felt comfortable with. Emacs users have
[SLIME](http://common-lisp.net/project/slime/) and Eclipse users have
[Counterclockwise](http://code.google.com/p/counterclockwise/). Vim
users have [VimClojure](https://github.com/vim-scripts/VimClojure), but
I wanted something a little more lightweight. Thankfully we also have
[vim-slime](https://github.com/jpalardy/vim-slime), which turned out to
be the perfect fit for me.

vim-slime is a Vim plugin that gives you an easy way to send text from a
Vim buffer to [tmux](http://tmux.sourceforge.net/) (or
[screen](http://www.gnu.org/software/screen/), but I wanted to learn
tmux). There are a couple of other HOWTOs on this setup, but frankly
they all seemed really complex for something that I felt should be
simple. My hope is that the rest of this article will help you get
started on building your own Vim + tmux + Clojure config

But first, here is a screenshot of my Clojure environment:

![Vim and a Clojure REPL in a tmux
window](/blog/2013/02/27/vim-tmux-clojure/vim-tmux-clojure.png)

You can see my Vim buffer on the left, a Clojure REPL in the top-right,
and a UNIX shell in the bottom-right. I can easily switch between these
panes using vi-style key sequences and, thanks to vim-slime, can send
code to the REPL with a simple Control-c, Control-c sequence.

Configuring tmux
----------------

I recommend that you configure tmux first; we’ll build on that
configuration over the next few sections.

Here is a copy of my `.tmux.conf` file:

    # ##############################################################
    # Global settings.
    #

    # Switch the prefix to Ctrl-a since Ctrl-b interferes with Vim.
    set -g prefix C-a
    unbind C-b

    # Change the default input delay in order to improve Vim
    # performance.
    set -sg escape-time 1

    # Number windows and panes starting at 1 so that we can jump to
    # them easier.
    set -g base-index 1
    set -g pane-base-index 1

    # vi mode.
    set -g mode-keys vi
    set -g status-keys vi

    # 256-color mode.
    set -g default-terminal "screen-256color"


    # ##############################################################
    # Key bindings.
    #

    # Reload .tmux.conf with "r".
    bind r source-file ~/.tmux.conf \; display "Reloaded!"

    # Split windows with a more visual set of characters.
    bind | split-window -h
    bind - split-window -v

    # Select panes with vi-style movement commands.
    bind h select-pane -L
    bind j select-pane -D
    bind k select-pane -U
    bind l select-pane -R

    # Resize panes with vi-style movement commands.
    bind -r H resize-pane -L 5
    bind -r J resize-pane -D 5
    bind -r K resize-pane -U 5
    bind -r L resize-pane -R 5

Most of those options should be self-explanatory and many of them were
taken directly from Brian P. Hogan’s excellent [book on
tmux](http://pragprog.com/book/bhtmux/tmux). In any event, only a few of
those options are actually required in order to use vim-slime; most of
them just make it a bit easier to work with tmux.

Once you have configured tmux to your liking, start a new tmux session
with `tmux new`. I use
[PuTTY](http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/) as my
terminal emulator and connect to tmux in a 161x49 character window. That
lets me have one 80x48 Vim editor and two 80x24 shell windows.

You can create the same setup by pressing Control-a, | to split the pane
horizontally, and then press Control-a, – to split the pane vertically.
You can then move around between the panes by pressing Control-a and the
vi movement keys (h, j, k, l).

Configuring Vim
---------------

I am going to assume that you already have a `.vimrc` file and know how
to install plugins with
[Pathogen](https://github.com/tpope/vim-pathogen). You should start with
the following Vim bundles and then expand from there
([paredit](http://www.vim.org/scripts/script.php?script_id=3998) is
worth learning, for example):

-   [rainbow\_parentheses](https://github.com/kien/rainbow_parentheses.vim)
-   [vim-clojure-static](https://github.com/guns/vim-clojure-static)
-   [vim-slime](https://github.com/jpalardy/vim-slime)

You then need to enable all of those items in your `.vimrc` file like
so:

    " Clojure options.
    let g:slime_target = "tmux"

    autocmd Syntax clojure RainbowParenthesesLoadRound
    autocmd BufEnter *.clj RainbowParenthesesToggle
    autocmd BufLeave *.clj RainbowParenthesesToggle

    let g:rbpt_colorpairs = [
        \ ['magenta',     'purple1'],
        \ ['cyan',        'magenta1'],
        \ ['green',       'slateblue1'],
        \ ['yellow',      'cyan1'],
        \ ['red',         'springgreen1'],
        \ ['magenta',     'green1'],
        \ ['cyan',        'greenyellow'],
        \ ['green',       'yellow1'],
        \ ['yellow',      'orange1'],
        \ ]
    let g:rbpt_max = 9

Using vim-slime
---------------

Start Vim in your large tmux pane (type `vim test.clj` so that we get a
Clojure buffer) and launch a Clojure REPL (using `lein repl`, for
example) in your top-right pane. Remember that you can use Control-a and
h, j, k, or l to move around between panes.

Type a Clojure form into your Vim buffer, perhaps something like the
following:

    (* 3 3 3)

Go back into command mode, position your cursor anywhere over that form,
and press Control-c, Control-c. This is probably the first time that you
have used vim-slime since launching Vim, which means that vim-slime
needs some information about tmux in order to route your Clojure code to
the proper tmux pane.

You will almost certainly want to accept the default socket name (of
“default”). The tmux target pane is going to depend on a few things.
First, did you name your tmux session or did you use the default name?
Have you created any other tmux windows? In which pane is your Clojure
REPL? Your target pane should be “:1.2” assuming that have followed this
tutorial to the letter. How would you determine that on your own though?

The value to the left of the colon is the name of tmux session. You can
leave that blank until you start using named tmux sessions. The
period-separated numbers to the right of the colon are the window number
and the pane number. Your current tmux window number is in the status
bar at the bottom of the screen. tmux pane numbers can be displayed by
pressing Control-a, q.

You can also type `tmux list-panes -a` into a shell window to see the
names of all of the valid vim-slime targets.

Final thoughts
--------------

Emacs and Eclipse can probably do more than what is possible with this
configuration, so you might want to consider those options if you are
shopping around for both a new editor and a new programming language. As
a Vim user though, I have been really happy with this configuration and
have found it to be a great way to integrate the Clojure REPL into my
development flow. I also like the fact that I can use these same tools
for interactive development in other languages: shell scripts, Node.js,
Python, etc.

There is only one disadvantage that I have found with this
configuration, and it was one of the reasons that I initially considered
switching editors: tmux doesn’t work on Windows and I do most of my
development on Windows. I have some thoughts on how to fix that problem
though. More on that in a future post.

Discussion
----------

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

© 1999–2013 Michael Alyn Miller

[RSS feed](/atom.xml) ▪ [@malyn](https://twitter.com/malyn)
\nThis markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://michaelalynmiller.com/blog/2013/02/27/vim-tmux-clojure/
