You are here: [Home](index.html) \> [DfT Patterns](DfT%20Patterns.html)
\> Humble Object

xUnit Patterns.com

Hosted by:[![image](xprime%20Logo.gif)](http://www.xprime.com.au)

Unit testing expertise at your fingertips!

Enter your search terms

  ----- -------------------
  Web   xunitpatterns.com
  ----- -------------------

Submit search form

[Home](index.html)**|**[Discuss](http://groups.yahoo.com/group/xunitpatterns/post)**|**[Lists](Cross%20References%20&%20Lists.html)

Humble Object
=============

The book has now been published and the content of this chapter has
likely changed substanstially.\
Please see page 695 of [xUnit Test Patterns](index.html) for the latest
information.\
*How can we make code testable when it is too closely coupled to its
environment?*\
\
**We extract the logic into a separate easy-to-test component that is
decoupled from its environment.**\
![image](Humble%20Object.gif)\
Sketch Humble Object embedded from Humble Object.gif\
\

We are often faced with trying to test software that is closely coupled
to some kind of framework. Examples include visual components (e.g.
widgets, dialogs, etc.) and transactional component plug-ins. Testing
these objects is hard because it can be expensive or impossible to
construct all the objects that our [system under test (SUT)](SUT.html)
needs to interact with. In other cases we have objects that are hard to
test because they run asynchronously; examples include active objects
(e.g. threads, processes, web servers, etc.) and user interfaces.
Testing these objects is hard because the asynchronicity introduces
uncertainty, interprocess coordination and the need for delays in tests.
Faced with all these issues developers often just give up on testing
this kind of code. This leads to [*Production
Bugs*](Production%20Bugs.html) (page X) caused by [*Untested
Code*](Production%20Bugs.html#Untested%20Code) and [*Untested
Requirements*](Production%20Bugs.html#Untested%20Requirement).

*Humble Object* is a way to bring the logic of these hard-to-instantiate
objects under test in a cost-effective manner.

How It Works
------------

We extract all the logic from the hard-to-test component into a
component that is testable via [synchronous
tests](synchronous%20test.html). This component implements a service
interface consisting of methods that expose all the logic of the
untestable component; the only difference is that they are accessible
via synchronous method calls. As a result, the *Humble Object* component
becomes a very thin adapter layer that contains very little code. Each
time the *Humble Object* is called by the framework, it delegates to the
testable component. If the testable component needs any information from
the context, the *Humble Object* is responsible for retrieving it and
passing it to the testable component. The *Humble Object* code is
typically so simple that we often don't bother writing tests for it
because it can be quite difficult to set up the environment need to run
it.

When To Use It
--------------

We can and should introduce a *Humble Object* whenever we have
non-trivial logic in a component that is hard to instantiate because it
depends on a framework or can only be accessed asynchronously. There are
lots of reasons for objects being hard-to-test so there need to be lots
of variations in how we break the dependencies. The following are the
most common examples of *Humble Object* but we shouldn't be surprised if
we need to invent our own variation.

#### Variation: Humble Dialog

Graphical user interface (GUI) frameworks require us to provide objects
to represent our pages and controls. These objects provide logic to
translate user actions into the underlying system actions and to
translate the system responses back into user recognizable behavior.
This logic may involve invoking the application behind the user
interface and/or modifying the state of this or other visual objects.

Visual objects are very hard to test efficiently because they are
tightly coupled to the presentation framework that invokes them. The
test would need to simulate that environment to provide the visual
object with all the information and facilities it requires. Further
complicating the issue is that these frameworks often run in their own
thread of control and that means we'll need to use [asynchronous
tests](asynchronous%20test.html) that are harder to write and result in
[*Slow Tests*](Slow%20Tests.html) (page X) and [*Nondeterministic
Tests*](Erratic%20Test.html#Nondeterministic%20Test) (see Erratic Test
on page X). We can use *Humble Object* here to move all the controller
and view updating logic out of the framework-dependent object into a
testable object.

#### Variation: Humble Executable

Many programs contain active objects. Active objects have their own
thread of execution so they can do things in parallel with other
activities of the system. Examples of active objects include anything
that runs in a separate process (e.g. Windows applications in .exe
files) or threads (in Java, any object that implements Runnable). They
may be launched directly by the client or they may be started
automatically and process requests from a queue and send replies via a
return message. Either way, we would have to write [asynchronous
tests](asynchronous%20test.html) (complete with interprocess
coordination and/or explicit delays and [*Neverfail
Tests*](Production%20Bugs.html#Neverfail%20Test) (see Production Bugs))
to verify their behavior.

*Humble Executable* is a way to bring the logic of the executable under
test without incurring the delays that lead to [*Slow
Tests*](Slow%20Tests.html) and [*Nondeterministic
Tests*](Erratic%20Test.html#Nondeterministic%20Test). We extract all the
logic from the executable into a component that is testable via
[synchronous tests](synchronous%20test.html). This component implements
a service interface consisting of methods that expose all the logic of
the executable; the only difference is that they are accessible via
synchronous method calls. The testable component may be a Windows DLL, a
Java JAR containing a [Service Facade](Service%20Facade.html)[CJ2EEP]
class or some other language component or class that exposes the
services of the executable in a testable way.

The *Humble Executable* component then contains very little code. All it
does in its thread of control is to load the testable component (if a
[True Humble Object](#True%20Humble%20Object)) and delegate to it. As a
result, it requires only one or two tests to verify it does this
correctly. These tests still take seconds to execute but they have a
much smaller impact on the overall test suite execution time since there
are so few of them. Since this code is not going to change very often,
these tests can even be omitted from the suite of tests that developers
execute before check in to speed up test suite execution times. Of
course, we would still prefer to run them from the automated build
process.

#### Variation: Humble Transaction Controller

Many applications use databases to persist their state. Fixture setup
with databases can be slow and complex, and leftover fixtures can wreak
havoc with subsequent tests and test runs. If we are using a [Shared
Fixture](Shared%20Fixture.html) (page X), this can cause [*Erratic
Tests*](Erratic%20Test.html). *Humble Transaction Controller* is a way
to make testing of the logic that runs within the transaction easier by
making it possible for the test to control the transaction. This allows
us to exercise the logic, verify the outcome and then abort the
transaction leaving no trace of our activity in the database.

To implement *Humble Transaction Controller* we use an [Extract
Method](Extract%20Method.html)[Fowler] refactoring to move all the logic
we want to test from the code that controls the transaction into a
separate method that knows nothing about transaction control and which
can be called by the test. Since the transaction control is done by the
caller, the test can start, commit (if it so chooses) and (most
commonly) roll back the transaction. This is one case where it is the
behavior and not the dependencies that cause us to bypass the *Humble
Object* when testing the business logic. As a result, we are more likely
to be able to get away with a [Poor Man's Humble Object](#Poor%20Man)
than in many other cases.

As for the *Humble Object*, it contains no business logic so the only
behavior that needs to be tested is whether it commits and rolls back
the transaction properly based on the outcome of the methods it calls.
We can write a test that replaces the testable component with a [Test
Stub](Test%20Stub.html) (page X) that throws an exception and verify
that this results in a roll back of the transaction. If we are using a
[Poor Man's Humble Object](#Poor%20Man), the stub would be implemented
as a [Subclassed Test
Double](Test-Specific%20Subclass.html#Subclassed%20Test%20Double) (see
Test-Specific Subclass on page X) that overrides the "real" methods with
ones that throw exceptions.

Many of the major application server technologies support this pattern
either directly or indirectly by taking transaction control away from
the business objects that we write. If we are building our software
without using a transaction control framework, we may need to implement
our own *Humble Transaction Controller*. See the "Implementation"
section for some ideas on how we can do the separation.

#### Variation: Humble Container Adapter

Speaking of "containers", we often have to implement specific interfaces
to allow our objects to run inside an application server (e.g. the "EJB
session bean" interface.) Another example of *Humble Object* is to
design our objects to be container-independent and have a *Humble
Container Adapter* that adapts them to the interface required by
container. This makes our logic components easy to test outside the
container which dramatically reduces the time for an "edit-compile-test"
cycle.

Implementation Notes
--------------------

We came make the logic that normally runs inside the *Humble Object*
testable in several different ways. All the ways involve exposing the
logic so that it can be verified using [synchronous
tests](synchronous%20test.html). What they vary in is how the logic is
exposed. Regardless of how the logic is exposed, test-driven purists
would like to see tests that verify that the *Humble Object* is calling
the extracted logic properly. This can be done by replacing the real
methods with some kind of [Test Double](Test%20Double.html) (page X)
implementation.

#### Variation: Poor Man's Humble Object

The simplest way is to isolate and expose each piece of logic we want to
verify into a separate method. We can do this by using an [Extract
Method](Extract%20Method.html) refactoring on inline logic and then
making the resulting method visible from the test. We have to make sure
that this method doesn't require anything from the context; it is best
if everything it needs to do its work is passed in as arguments but they
could also be placed in fields. It can be problematic if the testable
component needs to call methods to access information it needs if those
methods are dependent on the (non-existent / faked) context as this
makes writing the tests more complex.

This approach is the "poor man's" *Humble Object* and it works fine if
there are no obstacles to instantiating the *Humble Object* (e.g.
automatically starting its thread, no public constructor, unsatisfiable
dependencies, etc..) Use of a [Test-Specific
Subclass](Test-Specific%20Subclass.html) can also help break these
dependencies by providing a test-friendly constructor and exposing
private methods to the test.

When testing a [Subclassed Humble Object](#Subclassed%20Humble%20Object)
or a [Poor Man's Humble Object](#Poor%20Man), we can build the [Test
Spy](Test%20Spy.html) (page X) as a [Subclassed Test
Double](Test-Specific%20Subclass.html#Subclassed%20Test%20Double) of the
*Humble Object* to record when the methods in question were called. We
then use assertions within the [Test Method](Test%20Method.html) (page
X) to verify that the values recorded match what we expected.

#### Variation: True Humble Object

At the other extreme, we can put the logic we want to test into a
separate class and have the *Humble Object* delegate to an instance of
it. This is the approach implied in the introduction above and it will
work in almost any circumstance where we have complete control over the
code.

Sometimes the host framework requires certain responsibilities in its
objects that we cannot move elsewhere. For example a GUI framework
expects its view objects to contain data for the controls of the GUI and
the data the controls display on the screen. In these cases we have to
either give the testable object a reference to the *Humble Object* and
have it manipulate the data for it or put some minimal update logic in
the *Humble Object* and accept that it won't be covered by automated
tests. The former is almost always possible and is always preferable.

To refactor to a *True Humble Object*, we normally do a series of
[Extract Method](Extract%20Method.html) refactorings to decouple the
public interface of the *Humble Object* from the implementation logic we
plan to delegate. Then we do a [Extract
Class](Extract%20Class.html)[Fowler] refactoring moving all the methods
except the methods that define the public interface of the *Humble
Object*) to the new "testable" class. We introduce a
[attribute](attribute.html) (a field) to hold a reference to an instance
of the new class and initialized it to an instance of the new class
either as part of the constructor or using [Lazy
Initialization](Lazy%20Initialization.html)[SBPP] in each interface
method.

When testing a [True Humble Object](#True%20Humble%20Object) (where the
*Humble Object* delegates to a separate class) we typically use a [Lazy
Mock Object](Mock%20Object.html#Lazy%20Mock%20Object) (see Mock Object
on page X) or [Test Spy](Test%20Spy.html) to verify that the extracted
class is being called correctly. Note that using the more common [Active
Mock Object](Mock%20Object.html#Active%20Mock%20Object) (see Mock
Object) is problematic because the assertions are done on a different
thread from the [Testcase Object](Testcase%20Object.html) (page X) and
failures won't be detected unless we find a way to channel them back to
the test thread.

To ensure that the extracted testable component is being instantiated
properly, we can use an observable [Object
Factory](Dependency%20Lookup.html#Object%20Factory) (see Dependency
Lookup on page X) to construct the extracted component. The test can
register as a listener to verify the right method is being called on the
factory. We can also use a regular [factory](factory.html) object and
replace it during the test with a [Mock Object](Mock%20Object.html) or
[Test Stub](Test%20Stub.html) to be able to monitor which factory method
was called.

#### Variation: Subclassed Humble Object

In between these two are approaches that involve clever use of
subclassing to put the logic into separate classes but still allowing
them to be on a single object. There are a number of different ways to
do this depending on whether the *Humble Object* class needs to subclass
a specific framework class. I won't go into a lot of detail here as it
is very specific to the language and runtime environment but the basic
options are having the framework-dependent class inherit the logic to be
tested from a superclass or having it delegate to an abstract method
implemented by a subclass.

Motivating Example (Humble Executable)
--------------------------------------

In this example we are testing some logic that runs in its own thread
and processes each request as it arrives. In each test we start up the
thread, send it some messages and wait long enough so that our
assertions pass. Unfortunately, it takes several seconds for the thread
to start up, initialize and process the first request so the test fail
unless we include a two second delay after starting the thread.

~~~~ {.codeblock}
public class RequestHandlerThreadTest extends TestCase {
   private static final int TWO_SECONDS = 3000;
  
   public void testWasInitialized_Async() throws InterruptedException {
      // Setup:
      RequestHandlerThread sut = new RequestHandlerThread();
      // Exercise:
      sut.start();
      //    Verify:
      Thread.sleep(TWO_SECONDS);
      assertTrue(sut.initializedSuccessfully());
   }
  
   public void testHandleOneRequest_Async() throws InterruptedException {
      // Setup:
      RequestHandlerThread sut = new RequestHandlerThread();
      sut.start();
      // Exercise:
      enqueRequest(makeSimpleRequest());
      // Verify:
      Thread.sleep(TWO_SECONDS);
      assertEquals(1, sut.getNumberOfRequestsCompleted());
      assertResponseEquals(makeSimpleResponse(), getResponse());
   }
}
Example SlowAsynchronousTests embedded from java/com/xunitpatterns/dft/RequestHandlerThreadTest.java
~~~~

Ideally, we would like to test the thread with each kind of transaction
individually to get better [Defect
Localization](Goals%20of%20Test%20Automation.html#Defect%20Localization)
(see Goals of Test Automation on page X) but if we did that our test
suite would take many minutes to run since each test is delaying several
seconds. Another problem is that the tests won't result in an error if
our active object has an exception in it's own thread.

A two second delay may not seem like a big deal but consider what
happens when we have a dozen such tests. It would take us almost half a
minute to run these tests. Contrast this with normal tests; we can run
several hundred of those each second. Testing via the executable is
affecting our productivity negatively. For the record, here's the code
for the executable:

~~~~ {.codeblock}
public class RequestHandlerThread extends Thread {
   private boolean _initializationCompleted = false;
   private int _numberOfRequests = 0;
  
   public void run()  {
      initializeThread();
      processRequestsForever();
   }
  
   public boolean initializedSuccessfully() {
      return _initializationCompleted;
   }
  
   void processRequestsForever() {
      Request request = nextMessage();
      do {
         Response response = processOneRequest(request);
         if (response != null) {
            putMsgOntoOutputQueue(response);
         }
         request = nextMessage();
      } while (request != null);
   }
}
Example NonHumbleExecutable embedded from java/com/xunitpatterns/dft/RequestHandlerThread.java
~~~~

To avoid the distraction of the business logic I have already used an
[Extract Method](Extract%20Method.html) refactoring to move the real
logic into the method processOneRequest. Likewise, I'm not showing the
actual initialization logic; suffice it to say that it sets the variable
\_initializationCompleted when it finishes successfully.

Refactoring Notes
-----------------

To create a [Poor Man's Humble Object](#Poor%20Man), we just expose the
methods to make them visible from the test. (If the logic was inline,
we'd have to do an [Extract Method](Extract%20Method.html) refactorings
first.) If there were any dependencies on the context, we would need to
do an [Introduce Parameter](Introduce%20Parameter.html)[JBrains]
refactoring or [Introduce Field](Introduce%20Field.html)[JetBrains]
refactoring so that the processOneRequest method does not have to access
anything from the context.

To create a true *Humble Object*, we can do an [Extract
Class](Extract%20Class.html) refactoring on the executable to create the
testable component leaving behind just the *Humble Object* as an empty
shell. This typically involves doing the [Extract
Method](Extract%20Method.html) refactorings described above to separate
the logic we want to test (e.g. the initializeThread method and the
processOneRequest method) from the logic that interacts with the context
of the executable. We then do an [Extract Class](Extract%20Class.html)
refactoring to introduce the testable component class (essentially a
single [Strategy](Strategy.html)[GOF] object) and move all but the
public interface methods over to it. The [Extract
Class](Extract%20Class.html) refactoring includes introducing a field to
hold a reference to the new object and creating in instance. It also
includes fixing up all the public methods to call the methods that were
moved to the new testable class.

Example: Poor Man's Humble Executable
-------------------------------------

Here is the same set of tests rewritten as a [Poor Man's Humble
Object](#Poor%20Man):

~~~~ {.codeblock}
   public void testWasInitialized_Sync() throws InterruptedException {
      // Setup:
      RequestHandlerThread sut = new RequestHandlerThread();
      // Exercise:
      sut.initializeThread();
      // Verify:
      assertTrue(sut.initializedSuccessfully());
   }
  
   public void testHandleOneRequest_Sync() throws InterruptedException {
      // Setup:
      RequestHandlerThread sut = new RequestHandlerThread();
      // Exercise:
      Response response = sut.processOneRequest(makeSimpleRequest());
      // Verify:
      assertEquals(1, sut.getNumberOfRequestsCompleted());
      assertResponseEquals(makeSimpleResponse(), response);
   }
Example PoorMansHumbleExecTests embedded from java/com/xunitpatterns/dft/RequestHandlerThreadTest.java
~~~~

I have simply made the methods initializeThread and processOneRequest
public so that I could call them synchronously from the test. Note the
absence of a delay in this test. This approach works fine as long as we
can instantiate the executable component easily.

Example: True Humble Executible
-------------------------------

Here is the same test refactored to use a *True Humble Executible*:

~~~~ {.codeblock}
public class HumbleRequestHandlerThread extends Thread
implements Runnable {
   public RequestHandler requestHandler;
  
   public HumbleRequestHandlerThread() {
      super();
      requestHandler = new RequestHandlerImpl();
   }
  
   public void run() {
      requestHandler.initializeThread();
      processRequestsForever();
   }
  
   public boolean initializedSuccessfully() {
      return requestHandler.initializedSuccessfully();
   }
  
   public void processRequestsForever() {
      Request request = nextMessage();
      do {
         Response response = requestHandler.processOneRequest(request);
         if (response != null) {
            putMsgOntoOutputQueue(response);
         }
         request = nextMessage();
      } while (request != null);
   }
Example HumbleExecutable embedded from java/com/xunitpatterns/dft/HumbleRequestHandlerThread.java
~~~~

We have moved the method processOneRequest to a separate class that we
can instantiate easily. Here's the same test rewritten to take advantage
of the extracted component. Note the absence of a delay in this test.

~~~~ {.codeblock}
   public void testNotInitialized_Sync() throws InterruptedException {
      // Setup/Exercise:
      RequestHandler sut = new RequestHandlerImpl();
      // Verify:
      assertFalse("init", sut.initializedSuccessfully());
   }
  
   public void testWasInitialized_Sync() throws InterruptedException {
      //   Setup:
      RequestHandler sut = new RequestHandlerImpl();
      //   Exercise:
      sut.initializeThread();
      // Verify:
      assertTrue("init", sut.initializedSuccessfully());
   }
  
   public void testHandleOneRequest_Sync() throws InterruptedException {
      // Setup:
      RequestHandler sut = new RequestHandlerImpl();
      // Exercise:
      Response response = sut.processOneRequest( makeSimpleRequest() );
      // Verify:
      assertEquals( 1, sut.getNumberOfRequestsDone());
      assertResponseEquals( makeSimpleResponse(), response);
   }
Example SynchronousThreadTest embedded from java/com/xunitpatterns/dft/test/HumbleRequestHandlerTest.java
~~~~

Because we have introduced delegation to another object, we should
probably verify that the delegation occurs properly. Here's a test that
verifies that the *Humble Object* calls the initializeThread method and
the processOneRequest method on the newly created testable component:

~~~~ {.codeblock}
   public void testLogicCalled_Sync() throws InterruptedException {
      // Setup:
      RequestHandlerRecordingStub mockHandler = new RequestHandlerRecordingStub();
      HumbleRequestHandlerThread sut = new HumbleRequestHandlerThread();
      //    Mock Installation:
      sut.setHandler( mockHandler );
      sut.start();
      // Exercise:
      enqueRequest(makeSimpleRequest());
      // Verify:
      Thread.sleep(TWO_SECONDS);
      assertTrue("init", mockHandler.initializedSuccessfully() );
      assertEquals( 1, mockHandler.getNumberOfRequestsDone() );
   }
Example SynchronousThreadCallingTest embedded from java/com/xunitpatterns/dft/test/HumbleRequestHandlerTest.java
~~~~

Note that this test does require at least a small delay to allow the
thread to start up but the delay can be shorter because we have replaced
the real logic component with a [Test Double](Test%20Double.html) that
responds instantly and only this one test requires the delay. We could
even move this test to a separate test suite that is run less frequently
(say only during the automated build process) to keep the tests we run
before each check-in fast.

The other significant thing to note is that we are using a [Test
Spy](Test%20Spy.html) rather than a [Mock Object](Mock%20Object.html).
This is because the assertions done by the [Mock
Object](Mock%20Object.html) would be raised in a different thread from
the [Test Method](Test%20Method.html) so the [Test Automation
Framework](Test%20Automation%20Framework.html) (page X) (in this example
JUnit) won't catch them. The test could indicate "pass" even though
assertions in the [Mock Object](Mock%20Object.html) are failing. By
doing the assertions in the [Test Method](Test%20Method.html), we avoid
having to do something special to relay the exceptions thrown by the
[Mock Object](Mock%20Object.html) back to the thread in which the [Test
Method](Test%20Method.html) is executing.

This last test verified that our *Humble Object* actually delegates to
the [Test Spy](Test%20Spy.html) that we have installed. It would also be
good to verify that our *Humble Object* actually initializes the
variable holding the delegate to the appropriate class. Here's a simple
way to do this:

~~~~ {.codeblock}
   public void testConstructor() {
      // Exercise:
      HumbleRequestHandlerThread sut = new HumbleRequestHandlerThread();
      // Verify:
      String actualDelegateClass = sut.requestHandler.getClass().getName();
      assertEquals( RequestHandlerImpl.class.getName(), actualDelegateClass);
   }
Example StubbableAttributeInitializationTest embedded from java/com/xunitpatterns/dft/test/HumbleRequestHandlerTest.java
~~~~

Note that this is just a [Constructor
Test](Test%20Method.html#Constructor%20Test) (see Test Method) that
verifies a specific attribute has been initialized.

Example: Humble Dialog
----------------------

Many development environments let us build the user interface visually
by dragging and dropping various visual objects ("widgets") onto a
canvas. They let us add behavior to these visual objects by selecting
one of the possible actions or events specific to that visual object and
typing logic into the code window the IDE presents us with. This logic
may involve invoking the application behind the user interface or it may
involve modifying the state of this or other visual objects.

Visual objects are very hard to test efficiently because they are
tightly coupled to the presentation framework that invokes them. The
test would need to simulate that environment to provide the visual
object with all the information and facilities it requires. This makes
testing very complicated, so much so that many development teams don't
bother testing the presentation logic at all. This leads to [*Production
Bugs*](Production%20Bugs.html) caused by untested code and [*Untested
Requirements*](Production%20Bugs.html#Untested%20Requirement).

To create the *Humble Dialog*, we extract all the logic from the view
component into a non-visual component that is testable via [synchronous
tests](synchronous%20test.html). If this component needs to update the
view object's (the *Humble Dialog's*) state, the *Humble Dialog* is
passed in as an argument. When testing the non-visual component, we
typically replace the *Humble Dialog* with a [Mock
Object](Mock%20Object.html) that is configured with the [indirect
input](indirect%20input.html) values and the expected behavior
([indirect outputs](indirect%20output.html).) In some GUI frameworks,
where the *Humble Dialog* has to register itself with the framework for
each event it wishes to see, the non-visual component can register
itself instead of the *Humble Dialog* (as long as that doesn't introduce
unmanageable dependencies on the context) and this makes the *Humble
Dialog* even simpler because these events go directly to the non-visual
component and require no delegation logic.

The following code sample is from a VB view component (.ctl) with some
non-trivial logic. It is part of a custom plug-in we built for Mercury
Interactive's TestDirector tool.

~~~~ {.codeblock}
 ' Interface method, TestDirector will call this method
 ' to display the results.Public Sub ShowResultEx(TestSetKey As TdTestSetKey, _ TSTestKey As TdTestKey, _
                        ResultKey As TdResultKey)
    Dim RpbFiles As OcsRpbFiles
    Set RpbFiles = getTestResultFileNames(ResultKey)
    ResultsFileName = RpbFiles.ActualResultFileName
    ShowFileInBrowser ResultsFileName
End Sub

Function getTestResultFileNames(ResultKey As Variant) _ As OcsRpbFiles
    On Error GoTo Error
    Dim Attachments As Collection
    Dim thisTest As Run
    Dim RpbFiles As New OcsRpbFiles
    Call EnsureConnectedToTd
    Set Attachments = testManager.GetAllAttachmentsOfRunTest(ResultKey)
    Call RpbFiles.LoadFromCollection(Attachments, "RunTest")
    Set getTestResultFileNames = RpbFiles
    Exit Function
Error: ' do something ...End Function
Example VbViewWithLogic embedded from VB6/HumbleDialog-Not/ResultViewerPane.ctl
~~~~

Ideally, we would like to test the logic but we are unable to construct
the objects passed in as parameters because they don't have public
constructors. Passing in objects of some other type isn't possible
either because the types of the function parameters are hard-coded to be
specific concrete classes.

We can do an [Extract Testable
Component](Extract%20Testable%20Component.html) (page X) refactoring on
the executable to create the testable component leaving behind just the
*Humble Dialog* as an empty shell. This typically involves doing several
[Extract Method](Extract%20Method.html) refactorings (already done in
the original example to make the refactoring easier to understand), one
for each chunk of logic that we want to move. We then do an [Extract
Class](Extract%20Class.html) refactoring to create our new testable
component class. The [Extract Class](Extract%20Class.html) refactoring
may include both [Move Method](Move%20Method.html)[Fowler] refactorings
and [Move Field](Move%20Field.html)[Fowler] refactoring to move the
logic and the data it requires from the *Humble Dialog* to the new
testable component.

Here's the same view converted to a *Humble Dialog*:

~~~~ {.codeblock}
 ' Interface method, TestDirector will call this method
 ' to display the results.Public Sub ShowResultEx(TestSetKey As TdTestSetKey, _ TSTestKey As TdTestKey, _
                        ResultKey As TdResultKey)
    Dim RpbFiles As OcsRpbFiles
    Call EnsureImplExists
    Set RpbFiles = Implementation.getTestResultFileNames(ResultKey)
    ResultsFileName = RpbFiles.ActualResultFileName
    ShowFileInBrowser ResultsFileName
End Sub

Private Sub EnsureImplExists() If Implementation Is Nothing Then Set Implementation = New OcsScriptViewerImpl
    End If
End Sub
Example VbViewAsHumbleDialog embedded from VB6/HumbleDialog/ResultViewerPane.ctl
~~~~

Here's the testable component OcsScriptViewerImpl that the *Humble
Object* calls:

~~~~ {.codeblock}
'  ResultViewer Implemenation:
Public Function getTestResultFileNames(ResultKey As Variant) _ As OcsRpbFiles
    On Error GoTo Error

    Dim Attachments As Collection
    Dim thisTest As Run
    Dim RpbFiles As New OcsRpbFiles
    Call EnsureConnectedToTd
    Set Attachments = testManager.GetAllAttachmentsOfRunTest(ResultKey)
    Call RpbFiles.LoadFromCollection(Attachments, "RunTest")
    Set getTestResultFileNames = RpbFiles
    Exit Function
Error: ' do something ...End Function
Example VbDialogTestableComponent embedded from VB6/HumbleDialog/OcsScriptViewerImpl.cls
~~~~

We could now instantiate this OcsScriptViewerImpl class easily and write
[VbUnit](VbUnit.html) tests for it. I've omitted the tests for space
reasons because they don't really show anything particularly
interesting.

Example: Humble Transaction Controller
--------------------------------------

[Transaction Rollback Teardown](Transaction%20Rollback%20Teardown.html)
(page X) contains an example of writing tests that bypass the *Humble
Transaction Controller*. In the interest of space, I won't repeat them
here.

### Further Reading

See
[http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/TheHumbleDialogBox.pdf](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/TheHumbleDialogBox.pdf)
for Michael Feathers original write-up of [Humble
Dialog](#Humble%20Dialog).

* * * * *

* * * * *

Page generated at Wed Feb 09 16:39:35 +1100 2011

Copyright © 2003-2008 [Gerard
Meszaros](mailto:testautomationpatterns_at_gerardmeszaros.com) all
rights reserved

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **All Categories**
  [Introductory Narratives](Introductory%20Narratives.html)
  [Web Site Instructions](Web%20Site%20Instructions.html)
  [Code Refactorings](Code%20Refactorings.html)
  [Database Patterns](Database%20Patterns.html)
  [DfT Patterns](DfT%20Patterns.html)
  [External Patterns](External%20Patterns.html)
  [Fixture Setup Patterns](Fixture%20Setup%20Patterns.html)
  [Fixture Teardown Patterns](Fixture%20Teardown%20Patterns.html)
  [Front Matter](Front%20Matter.html)
  [Glossary](Glossary.html)
  [Misc](Misc.html)
  [References](References.html)
  [Result Verification Patterns](Result%20Verification%20Patterns.html)
  [Sidebars](Sidebars.html)
  [Terminology](Terminology.html)
  [Test Double Patterns](Test%20Double%20Patterns.html)
  [Test Organization](Test%20Organization.html)
  [Test Refactorings](Test%20Refactorings.html)
  [Test Smells](Test%20Smells.html)
  [Test Strategy](Test%20Strategy.html)
  [Tools](Tools.html)
  [Value Patterns](Value%20Patterns.html)
  [XUnit Basics](XUnit%20Basics.html)
  [xUnit Members](xUnit%20Members.html)
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **All "DfT Patterns"**
  [Dependency Injection](Dependency%20Injection.html)
  [Dependency Lookup](Dependency%20Lookup.html)
  [Humble Object](Humble%20Object.html)
  [*--Humble Dialog*](Humble%20Object.html#Humble%20Dialog)
  [*--Humble Executable*](Humble%20Object.html#Humble%20Executable)
  [*--Humble Transaction Controller*](Humble%20Object.html#Humble%20Transaction%20Controller)
  [*--Humble Container Adapter*](Humble%20Object.html#Humble%20Container%20Adapter)
  [*--Poor Man's Humble Object*](Humble%20Object.html#Poor%20Man)
  [*--True Humble Object*](Humble%20Object.html#True%20Humble%20Object)
  [*--Subclassed Humble Object*](Humble%20Object.html#Subclassed%20Humble%20Object)
  [Test Hook](Test%20Hook.html)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://xunitpatterns.com/Humble%20Object.html
