[![image](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-JOqxgp-ZWe0/U3BtyEQlEiI/AAAAAAAAOfg/Doq6Q2MwIKA/s1600/google-logo-874x288.png)](/.)

[](/.)

Official Blog
-------------

Insights from Googlers into our products, technology, and the Google
culture

[Introducing the Knowledge Graph: things, not strings](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not.html "Introducing the Knowledge Graph: things, not strings")
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Posted: Wednesday, May 16, 2012

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

*Cross-posted on the [Inside Search
Blog](http://insidesearch.blogspot.com/2012/05/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not.html)\
*\
 Search is a lot about discovery—the basic human need to learn and
broaden your horizons. But searching still requires a lot of hard work
by you, the user. So today I’m really excited to launch the Knowledge
Graph, which will help you discover new information quickly and easily.
\
 \
 Take a query like [taj mahal]. For more than four decades, search has
essentially been about matching keywords to queries. To a search engine
the words [taj mahal] have been just that—two words.\
 \
 But we all know that [taj mahal] has a much richer meaning. You might
think of one of the world’s most beautiful monuments, or a Grammy
Award-winning musician, or possibly even a casino in Atlantic City, NJ.
Or, depending on when you last ate, the nearest Indian restaurant. It’s
why we’ve been working on an intelligent model—in geek-speak, a
“graph”—that understands real-world entities and their relationships to
one another: things, not strings. \
 \
 The Knowledge Graph enables you to search for things, people or places
that Google knows about—landmarks, celebrities, cities, sports teams,
buildings, geographical features, movies, celestial objects, works of
art and more—and instantly get information that’s relevant to your
query. This is a critical first step towards building the next
generation of search, which taps into the collective intelligence of the
web and understands the world a bit more like people do.\
 \
 Google’s Knowledge Graph isn’t just rooted in public sources such as
Freebase, Wikipedia and the CIA World Factbook. It’s also augmented at a
much larger scale—because we’re focused on comprehensive breadth and
depth. It currently contains more than 500 million objects, as well as
more than 3.5 billion facts about and relationships between these
different objects. And it’s tuned based on what people search for, and
what we find out on the web.\
 \
 The Knowledge Graph enhances Google Search in three main ways to
start:\
 \
 **1. Find the right thing**\
 Language can be ambiguous—do you mean Taj Mahal the monument, or Taj
Mahal the musician? Now Google understands the difference, and can
narrow your search results just to the one you mean—just click on one of
the links to see that particular slice of results:\
 \

[![image](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-eWJEHSdNVbU/T7PKlBLFF6I/AAAAAAAAJKo/-GmvscoTPJg/s1600/taj%2Bmahal.png)](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-eWJEHSdNVbU/T7PKlBLFF6I/AAAAAAAAJKo/-GmvscoTPJg/s1600/taj%2Bmahal.png)

This is one way the Knowledge Graph makes Google Search more
intelligent—your results are more relevant because we understand these
entities, and the nuances in their meaning, the way you do.\
 \
 **2. Get the best summary**\
 With the Knowledge Graph, Google can better understand your query, so
we can summarize relevant content around that topic, including key facts
you’re likely to need for that particular thing. For example, if you’re
looking for Marie Curie, you’ll see when she was born and died, but
you’ll also get details on her education and scientific discoveries:\
 \

[![image](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-6CZW79UMwyg/T7PKsKaiyyI/AAAAAAAAJK0/yj5a8qKknQg/s2000/marie%2Bcurie.png)](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-6CZW79UMwyg/T7PKsKaiyyI/AAAAAAAAJK0/yj5a8qKknQg/s2000/marie%2Bcurie.png)

How do we know which facts are most likely to be needed for each item?
For that, we go back to our users and study in aggregate what they’ve
been asking Google about each item. For example, people are interested
in knowing what books Charles Dickens wrote, whereas they’re less
interested in what books Frank Lloyd Wright wrote, and more in what
buildings he designed.\
 \
 The Knowledge Graph also helps us understand the relationships between
things. Marie Curie is a person in the Knowledge Graph, and she had two
children, one of whom also won a Nobel Prize, as well as a husband,
Pierre Curie, who claimed a third Nobel Prize for the family. All of
these are linked in our graph. It’s not just a catalog of objects; it
also models all these inter-relationships. It’s the intelligence
*between* these different entities that’s the key.\
 \
 **3. Go deeper and broader**\
 Finally, the part that’s the most fun of all—the Knowledge Graph can
help you make some unexpected discoveries. You might learn a new fact or
new connection that prompts a whole new line of inquiry. Do you know
where Matt Groening, the creator of the Simpsons (one of my all-time
favorite shows), got the idea for Homer, Marge and Lisa’s names? It’s a
bit of a surprise:\
 \

[![image](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-CPt7-kfOngo/T7PO0sTFTgI/AAAAAAAAJLw/s-gfrkimFAU/s2000/matt%2Bgroening.png)](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-CPt7-kfOngo/T7PO0sTFTgI/AAAAAAAAJLw/s-gfrkimFAU/s2000/matt%2Bgroening.png)

We’ve always believed that the perfect search engine should understand
exactly what you mean and give you back exactly what you want. And we
can now sometimes help answer your next question before you’ve asked it,
because the facts we show are informed by what other people have
searched for. For example, the information we show for Tom Cruise
answers 37 percent of next queries that people ask about him. In fact,
some of the most serendipitous discoveries I’ve made using the Knowledge
Graph are through the magical “People also search for” feature. One of
my favorite books is *The White Tiger*, the debut novel by Aravind
Adiga, which won the prestigious Man Booker Prize. Using the Knowledge
Graph, I discovered three other books that had won the same prize and
one that won the Pulitzer. I can tell you, this suggestion was spot on!\
 \
 We’ve begun to gradually roll out this view of the Knowledge Graph to
U.S. English users. It’s also going to be available on smartphones and
tablets—read more about how we’ve [tailored this to mobile
devices](http://insidesearch.blogspot.com/2012/05/knowledge-graph-for-mobile-and-tablet.html).
And watch our video (also available on our
[site](http://www.google.com/insidesearch/features/search/knowledge.html)
about the Knowledge Graph) that gives a deeper dive into the details and
technology, in the words of people who've worked on this project:\
 \
 \
 \
 We hope this added intelligence will give you a more complete picture
of your interest, provide smarter search results, and pique your
curiosity on new topics. We’re proud of our first baby step—the
Knowledge Graph—which will enable us to make search more intelligent,
moving us closer to the "Star Trek computer" that I've always dreamt of
building. Enjoy your lifelong journey of discovery, made easier by
Google Search, so you can spend less time searching and more time doing
what you love.\
 \
 Posted by Amit Singhal, SVP, Engineering

[Google](https://plus.google.com/112374322230920073195)

Labels: [search](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/search)

[Newer
Post](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/shiver-me-timbers-2012-d4g-winner-is.html "Newer Post")
[Older
Post](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/new-research-shows-smartphone-growth-is.html "Older Post")
[Home](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/)

Search This Blog
----------------

Loading...

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=CustomSearch&widgetId=CustomSearch1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-top "Edit")

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML7&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-top "Edit")

Labels
------

-   [accessibility](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/accessibility)
    (38)
-   [acquisition](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/acquisition)
    (26)
-   [ads](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/ads) (131)
-   [Africa](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Africa) (19)
-   [Android](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Android)
    (53)
-   [apps](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/apps) (417)
-   [April 1](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/April%201)
    (4)
-   [Asia](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Asia) (38)
-   [books + book
    search](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/books%20%2B%20book%20search)
    (48)
-   [chrome + chrome
    os](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/chrome%20%2B%20chrome%20os)
    (76)
-   [commerce](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/commerce)
    (12)
-   [computing
    history](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/computing%20history)
    (7)
-   [crisis
    response](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/crisis%20response)
    (31)
-   [culture](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/culture) (9)
-   [developers](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/developers)
    (120)
-   [display
    advertising](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/display%20advertising)
    (9)
-   [diversity](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/diversity)
    (25)
-   [doodles](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/doodles)
    (60)
-   [education and
    research](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/education%20and%20research)
    (144)
-   [enterprise](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/enterprise)
    (80)
-   [entrepreneurs at
    Google](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/entrepreneurs%20at%20Google)
    (14)
-   [Europe](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Europe) (46)
-   [faster
    web](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/faster%20web)
    (16)
-   [free
    expression](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/free%20expression)
    (61)
-   [google.org](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/google.org)
    (64)
-   [googleplus](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/googleplus)
    (50)
-   [googlers and
    culture](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/googlers%20and%20culture)
    (202)
-   [green](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/green) (99)
-   [Latin
    America](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Latin%20America)
    (18)
-   [maps and
    earth](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/maps%20and%20earth)
    (183)
-   [mobile](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/mobile) (125)
-   [online
    safety](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/online%20safety)
    (19)
-   [open
    source](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/open%20source)
    (19)
-   [photos](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/photos) (34)
-   [policy and
    issues](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/policy%20and%20issues)
    (138)
-   [politics](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/politics)
    (67)
-   [privacy](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/privacy)
    (66)
-   [recruiting and
    hiring](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/recruiting%20and%20hiring)
    (32)
-   [scholarships](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/scholarships)
    (31)
-   [search](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/search) (482)
-   [search
    quality](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/search%20quality)
    (24)
-   [search
    trends](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/search%20trends)
    (78)
-   [security](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/security)
    (32)
-   [small
    business](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/small%20business)
    (30)
-   [user experience and
    usability](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/user%20experience%20and%20usability)
    (41)
-   [youtube and
    video](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/youtube%20and%20video)
    (140)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=Label&widgetId=Label1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

Archive
-------

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2014](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2014-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2015-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (103)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_09_01_archive.html)
        (12)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_08_01_archive.html)
        (7)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_07_01_archive.html)
        (13)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_06_01_archive.html)
        (13)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_05_01_archive.html)
        (17)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_04_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_03_01_archive.html)
        (13)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_02_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014_01_01_archive.html)
        (6)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2013](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2013-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2014-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (190)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_12_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_11_01_archive.html)
        (13)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_10_01_archive.html)
        (15)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_09_01_archive.html)
        (12)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_08_01_archive.html)
        (10)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_07_01_archive.html)
        (13)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_06_01_archive.html)
        (28)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_05_01_archive.html)
        (16)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_04_01_archive.html)
        (21)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_03_01_archive.html)
        (18)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_02_01_archive.html)
        (19)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013_01_01_archive.html)
        (14)

-   [▼](javascript:void(0))
    [2012](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2012-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2013-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (269)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_12_01_archive.html)
        (25)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_11_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_10_01_archive.html)
        (18)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_09_01_archive.html)
        (16)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_08_01_archive.html)
        (19)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_07_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_06_01_archive.html)
        (28)

    -   [▼](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_05_01_archive.html)
        (30)
        -   [Expanding the Internet domain
            space](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/expanding-internet-domain-space.html)
        -   [Explore historic sites with the World Wonders
            Proj...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/explore-historic-sites-with-world.html)
        -   [Local—now with a dash of Zagat and a sprinkle of
            G...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/localnow-with-dash-of-zagat-and.html)
        -   [Next step in the Chrome OS
            journey](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/next-step-in-chrome-os-journey.html)
        -   [The fight against scam ads—by the
            numbers](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/fight-against-scam-adsby-numbers.html)
        -   [Transparency for copyright removals in
            search](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/transparency-for-copyright-removals-in.html)
        -   [Google+ for Android: polish and
            performance](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/google-for-android-polish-and.html)
        -   [A faster, simpler Google Search app for
            iPhone](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/faster-simpler-google-search-app-for.html)
        -   [Software downloads in
            Syria](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/software-downloads-in-syria.html)
        -   [A tribute to Bob Moog, sonic
            doodler](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/tribute-to-bob-moog-sonic-doodler.html)
        -   [A world of opportunity at the G(irls)20
            Summit](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/world-of-opportunity-at-girls20-summit.html)
        -   [We’ve acquired Motorola
            Mobility](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/weve-acquired-motorola-mobility.html)
        -   [Announcing the 90 regional finalists of the
            Google...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/announcing-90-regional-finalists-of.html)
        -   [A look inside our 2011 diversity
            report](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/look-inside-our-2011-diversity-report.html)
        -   [Helping students fish for a better future in the
            l...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/helping-students-fish-for-better-future.html)
        -   [Shiver me timbers, the 2012 D4G Winner
            is....](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/shiver-me-timbers-2012-d4g-winner-is.html)
        -   [Introducing the Knowledge Graph: things, not
            strin...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not.html)
        -   [New research shows smartphone growth is
            global](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/new-research-shows-smartphone-growth-is.html)
        -   [Follow an email’s journey with Story of
            Send](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/follow-emails-journey-with-story-of.html)
        -   [Think Insights now includes research from 21
            count...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/think-insights-now-includes-research.html)
        -   [Celebrating our super-mom
            users](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/celebrating-our-super-mom-users.html)
        -   [Supporting Innovation in African
            News](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/supporting-innovation-in-african-news.html)
        -   [A Google guide to summer
            vacation](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/google-guide-to-summer-vacation.html)
        -   [Google+: a mobile app with sense and
            soul](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/google-mobile-app-with-sense-and-soul.html)
        -   [Accelerating diversity in entrepreneurship with
            Ne...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/accelerating-diversity-in.html)
        -   [Celebrating teachers on National Teacher
            Day](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/celebrating-teachers-on-national.html)
        -   [Google+ Hangouts On Air: broadcast your
            conversati...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/google-hangouts-on-air-broadcast-your.html)
        -   [70 young women recognized as Google Anita Borg
            Mem...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/70-young-women-recognized-as-google.html)
        -   [Get stuff done in the cloud. Go
            Google.](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/get-stuff-done-in-cloud-go-google.html)
        -   [The Doodle 4 Google State Winners—and time to
            vote...](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/doodle-4-google-state-winnersand-time.html)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_04_01_archive.html)
        (19)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_03_01_archive.html)
        (27)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_02_01_archive.html)
        (23)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012_01_01_archive.html)
        (24)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2011](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2011-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2012-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (435)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_12_01_archive.html)
        (33)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_11_01_archive.html)
        (35)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_10_01_archive.html)
        (33)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_09_01_archive.html)
        (29)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_08_01_archive.html)
        (33)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_07_01_archive.html)
        (26)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_06_01_archive.html)
        (36)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_05_01_archive.html)
        (53)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_04_01_archive.html)
        (42)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_03_01_archive.html)
        (45)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_02_01_archive.html)
        (37)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011_01_01_archive.html)
        (33)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2010](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2010-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2011-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (454)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_12_01_archive.html)
        (52)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_11_01_archive.html)
        (32)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_10_01_archive.html)
        (38)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_09_01_archive.html)
        (37)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_08_01_archive.html)
        (31)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_07_01_archive.html)
        (38)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_06_01_archive.html)
        (45)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_05_01_archive.html)
        (46)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_04_01_archive.html)
        (37)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_03_01_archive.html)
        (44)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_02_01_archive.html)
        (29)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2010_01_01_archive.html)
        (25)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2009](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2009-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2010-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (423)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_12_01_archive.html)
        (51)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_11_01_archive.html)
        (47)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_10_01_archive.html)
        (55)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_09_01_archive.html)
        (27)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_08_01_archive.html)
        (23)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_07_01_archive.html)
        (26)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_06_01_archive.html)
        (34)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_05_01_archive.html)
        (38)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_04_01_archive.html)
        (34)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_03_01_archive.html)
        (34)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_02_01_archive.html)
        (25)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2009_01_01_archive.html)
        (29)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2008](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2008-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2009-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (368)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_12_01_archive.html)
        (25)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_11_01_archive.html)
        (31)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_10_01_archive.html)
        (43)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_09_01_archive.html)
        (54)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_08_01_archive.html)
        (23)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_07_01_archive.html)
        (27)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_06_01_archive.html)
        (24)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_05_01_archive.html)
        (30)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_04_01_archive.html)
        (27)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_03_01_archive.html)
        (33)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_02_01_archive.html)
        (36)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008_01_01_archive.html)
        (15)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2007](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2007-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2008-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (300)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_12_01_archive.html)
        (30)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_11_01_archive.html)
        (23)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_10_01_archive.html)
        (30)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_09_01_archive.html)
        (17)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_08_01_archive.html)
        (18)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_07_01_archive.html)
        (22)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_06_01_archive.html)
        (28)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_05_01_archive.html)
        (25)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_04_01_archive.html)
        (31)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_03_01_archive.html)
        (35)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_02_01_archive.html)
        (21)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2007_01_01_archive.html)
        (20)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2006](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2006-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2007-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (292)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_12_01_archive.html)
        (24)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_11_01_archive.html)
        (31)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_10_01_archive.html)
        (33)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_09_01_archive.html)
        (26)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_08_01_archive.html)
        (32)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_07_01_archive.html)
        (18)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_06_01_archive.html)
        (25)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_05_01_archive.html)
        (19)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_04_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_03_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_02_01_archive.html)
        (26)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2006_01_01_archive.html)
        (18)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2005](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2005-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2006-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (199)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_12_01_archive.html)
        (18)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_11_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_10_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_09_01_archive.html)
        (27)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_08_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_07_01_archive.html)
        (14)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_06_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_05_01_archive.html)
        (18)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_04_01_archive.html)
        (16)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_03_01_archive.html)
        (21)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_02_01_archive.html)
        (7)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2005_01_01_archive.html)
        (7)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2004](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/search?updated-min=2004-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&updated-max=2005-01-01T00:00:00-08:00&max-results=50)
    (58)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_12_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_11_01_archive.html)
        (7)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_10_01_archive.html)
        (14)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_09_01_archive.html)
        (7)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_08_01_archive.html)
        (2)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_07_01_archive.html)
        (4)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_06_01_archive.html)
        (5)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_05_01_archive.html)
        (7)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2004_04_01_archive.html)
        (1)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=BlogArchive&widgetId=BlogArchive1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

[](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/atom.xml)

Feed
----

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML6&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

[Follow @google](https://twitter.com/google)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML5&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-bottom "Edit")

Give us feedback in our [Product
Forums](http://support.google.com/bin/static.py?hl=en&page=portal_groups.cs).

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-bottom "Edit")

Company-wide
------------

-   [Public Policy
    Blog](//googlepublicpolicy.blogspot.com/ "Public Policy")
-   [Research Blog](//googleresearch.blogspot.com/ "Research")
-   [Student Blog](//googleforstudents.blogspot.com/ "Student")

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML2&action=editWidget&sectionId=footer-1 "Edit")

Products
--------

-   [Official Android Blog](//officialandroid.blogspot.com/ "Android")
-   [Chrome Blog](//chrome.blogspot.com/ "Chrome")
-   [Lat Long Blog](//google-latlong.blogspot.com/ "Lat Long")

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML3&action=editWidget&sectionId=footer-2 "Edit")

Developers
----------

-   [Developers Blog](//googledevelopers.blogspot.com/ "Developers")
-   [Ads Developer
    Blog](//googleadsdeveloper.blogspot.com/ "Ads Developer")
-   [Android Developers
    Blog](//android-developers.blogspot.com/ "Android")

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=10861780&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML4&action=editWidget&sectionId=footer-3 "Edit")

-   [Google](//www.google.com/)
-   [Privacy & Terms](//www.google.com/intl/en/policies/)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not.html
