[“As bad as anything else”](http://ferd.ca/ "home")
===================================================

2011 01 04

An Open Letter to the Erlang Beginner (or Onlooker)
---------------------------------------------------

One of the \#erlang regulars, [Jesper Louis Andersen
(jlouis)](https://github.com/jlouis/ "bitbucket account") recently
posted [a
reply](http://jlouisramblings.blogspot.com/2010/12/response-to-erlang-overhyped-or.html)
to an [old post about whether Erlang is overhyped or
not](http://sacharya.com/erlang-overhyped-or-underestimated/).

I definitely have to agree with jlouis on this one and his blog post is
pretty good. His reply stirred a lot of arguments up on social websites
such as reddit or Hacker News, but really none of these arguments were
new or unknown to the Erlang community. I've decided to write this blog
post addressing a few points about it.

### The Syntax? Oh God

Erlang's syntax has always caused problems to newcomers (or even some
long-time users of the language). Jlouis had great arguments on the
syntax with regards to his post: you have to differentiate semantics
from syntax itself. Erlang's semantics are what should be seen as
important, but it's rarely done.

For what it's worth, I have published [another blog
post](http://ferd.ca/on-erlang-s-syntax.html) on Erlang's syntax
(particularly the punctuation) to maybe make it friendlier overall, but
I don't think syntax as a whole is a problem that can be solved for
people who don't like it.

I would just add that a different syntax helps getting in a different
mindset, which is particularly useful when learning new paradigms. It
might seem like something really annoying, but you'd be surprised how
often we see people trying to shoehorn whatever concept they know from
imperative or OO programming (or even some functional idioms) into
Erlang. That just doesn't work most of the time. You have to learn the
basics and forcing you out of your comfort zone by way of syntax might
help with this. Speaking of which...

### Erlang WILL be slow (because you don't know how to use it)

Erlang will be particularly slow when you first use it. Again this is
mostly due to not knowing the idioms of functional (or concurrent)
languages, how to intuitively work with persistent data structures, when
to use different kinds of strings, recursion, storage, etc. This effect
won't be as obvious if you know functional programming already.

Then there's the subject of traditional benchmarks (like those in [the
computer language benchmark game](http://shootout.alioth.debian.org/)).
Traditional benchmarks are usually flawed in one way or another if you
try to use them as a way to know how fast your software will be: they
focus on a single part of an entire system, stressing one or a few
properties at a time. Interesting cases are real-world applications
where the difference between IO-bound, Disk-bound and CPU-bound problems
aren't compartmentalized in their own boxes, but interact one with each
other. What happens when you're disk-bound on a task but queries coming
from the network come at a faster rate? What happens when two components
wait for the same resource that's slower than both of them? Few
benchmarks will demonstrate this very well. In fact, the computer
benchmark game [explicitly acknowledges
this](http://shootout.alioth.debian.org/flawed-benchmarks.php), but
unfortunately not all benchmarks do, and not all readers care about such
notices. Other benchmarks can be conducted by people who do not
understand all the languages or properties of the systems they test (I
remember seeing benchmarks where the tester assumed Erlang processes
were OS processes that mapped to a processor core directly, which is
entirely wrong). Not all benchmarks are useless and Erlang will
sometimes be slow for some CPU-bound tasks, but this alone shouldn't
discourage you if your problem isn't all about CPU time.

Speed isn't a property of a language, but also a property of your own
code and the algorithms chosen (nothing new there). It's also heavily
dependent on the architecture of the system that your program will be
running on, from the machines chosen to how smartly you cache stuff,
organize parts that communicate together, and generally manage to have
your code do less. That being said, Erlang doesn't have true arrays or
hashmaps with average constant access time; this is going to be a big
hurdle to many programmers not used to working without them.

### String Handling doesn't matter that often

String handling is one particular thing that Erlang has a bad reputation
with. By default, they're linked lists of integers, which isn't
particulary memory efficient. Then they're linked lists, so modifying
the string is often an O(n) operation. Jlouis described the problem
pretty well with his blog post: strings are often overused in many
languages — types or objects such as atoms can do the job better.

In Erlang, you can't blindly use a single kind of string and call it a
day. You have to think about what the string will be used for:
communication between processes, output, storage, etc.? For
communication between processes, atoms are particularly efficient. They
are to be used as a tag on messages, a label differentiating them from
each other. You get constant time comparison and pattern matching
(although this is more complex in distributed settings). Then binary
strings are particularly space-efficient. They can also break the
'nothing shared' principles of Erlang when large enough (although nobody
should build on that property) to gain in space some more. Lastly, you
have iolists. An iolist is any list of strings, single characters,
binaries, etc. They're loosely defined data structure that allow you to
basically shove anything that could be text-related in the same package
in any order, and the output drivers (written in C) will handle the
flattening and conversion for you. Outputting the message "The sky is
blue" could be done as
`[<<"the">>, 32, [$s,$k,[<<"y ">>,["is"]] | [" ", ["blue"]]], "."]`.
This is ugly, but this allows constant-time appending and pre-pending
without rewriting any existing data, which is something usually not
doable with persistent data structures such as lists.

Picking the right data structures will work wonders on letting your code
become faster. Sadly, this is not something intuitive and it only comes
with experience and some studying of others' code.

### It's OO, but pretend it isn't, please

Erlang is sometimes said to be object-oriented in the original meaning
of it: each process acts as an object communicating through message
passing. While this sounds good, you'll hit a wall if that's how you
approach things. Erlang's processes are meant as a way to separate
individual components to provide fault-tolerance; not to compose them
and have them interacting on a level as low as function calls all the
time. Representing a list or a tree node as a process is useless, while
they could very well be objects in any OO language.

Erlang's processes are a way to provide fault-tolerance first. This can
be tolerance to some weird hardware failure, a programmer error,
corrupted data, etc. That an OO-like system emerges from it is purely
accidental. Similarly, the kind of gold rush towards parallelism that
Erlang had during the last few years (it's what brought me in, too!) is
kind of misplaced. Again, parallelism is a byproduct of what Erlang
focuses on. You can read more on that in [The Hitchhikers Guide to
Concurrency](http://learnyousomeerlang.com/the-hitchhikers-guide-to-concurrency).

### Lack of types

I realize the usefulness of types. I realize leaving it all up to the
compiler helps. I realize it reduces the need for as many tests
(although not all of them). The Erlang community realizes it too. So
much that Erlang has its own type inference system with
[annotations](http://www.erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/typespec.html)
that is entirely optional. However, the typing system is kind of funny
and is based on success typing. Basically, if types à la Hindley-Milner
are overly restrictive in what they allow, success types do the opposite
and assume broad types while inferring them, and won't warn you until a
condition that will provoke a crash (or breaches one of your
annotations) is 100% sure to have been found. It's worth reading about
them in [Practical Type Inference Based on Success
Typings](http://www.it.uu.se/research/group/hipe/papers/succ_types.pdf).

Now, having something enforcing strict typing before compiling or
running the code *is* pretty nice, but the point I want to make here is
that it's not the end of all programming woes. Errors **will** happen
anyway in most projects. What do you do when they happen in running
code? If your language of choice has no solution for that, you might be
interested in learning more about how Erlang does things. More on this
later.

### And ugh, the documentation is terrible!

It is and it is not. Erlang's manuals are mostly written as a reference
for people who know them already. It's often hard to pick up something
new just by reading doc; purpose isn't frequently explained, the raison
d'être of a library is not always there, and precise examples on how to
use them are sparse. Again, they are a reference, not a tutorial. As a
reference, they do a great job—except the part where you need to
navigate through them.

Before providing explanations, I'll link to
[erldocs.com](http://erldocs.com), an alternative documentation site
written by [Dale Harvey](http://arandomurl.com/). It's searchable and
does a great job at helping you find out specific functions you need.
There's also [demo.erlang.org](http://demo.erlang.org/erldoc) if you
want an alternative alternative.

If you feel like staying with the official site, I'll show you how to
navigate it, because again it's made for people who know Erlang and it's
hard to get around it.

In Erlang, every standalone bit of code you might release can be stored
as an *application*. Erlang applications aren't like your normal
applications. They can hold pieces of code that need to be stopped and
started (like a web server) from the Erlang shell itself, or just a flat
group of modules that can be used as a library. So the standard library
containing modules for lists, dictionaries, trees, sets, etc. exits
under the 'stdlib' application. You can get an index of all applications
[on this page](http://www.erlang.org/doc/applications.html).

Now if you click some applications there, say
[kernel](http://www.erlang.org/doc/apps/kernel/index.html), under basic,
you will see a list of all modules in kernel. This application has only
a reference manual -- no tutorial so to say. If you instead look for the
[debugger](http://www.erlang.org/doc/apps/debugger/index.html), you'll
see a link towards the [debugger users'
guide](http://www.erlang.org/doc/apps/debugger/users_guide.html). This
one should contain friendlier documentation. Again, not all Erlang
applications contain nice tutorials like the debugger does, but it's a
good way to get started. Once you know your way around it, you might end
up thinking the Erlang documentation is pretty damn good. If you don't,
you can still pay us a little visit in \#erlang on freenode (you need a
registered nickname there).

### Focus on maintenance

We can now start thinking positive a little bit. Erlang was (and still
is) developed somewhat iteratively with lots of feedback from engineers
in the industry. Back in the day, it was telecom guys 'building bridges'
and needing real reliability. Nowadays, these guys are still there, but
a whole lot of people from other domains are added to the group.
Overall, this gave Erlang the perspective of focusing on maintenance and
making things work in the long run.

Most tools and libraries developed for Erlang are built with the idea
that they will be running for years uninterrupted. Erlang's code is
coming with a comprehensive test suite, a commitment to backwards
compatibility (this happens to slow language development down quite a
bit sometimes), and the whole system is meant to be fiddled with and
debuggable.

Erlang supports tracing on a VM level: you can set it on a per-process
basis, see what happens with messages sent and received, function calls.
These tracing flags can be made so the tracing only fires for functions
from a given module or functions with specific arguments. You can also
choose how processes will inherit the processing flags, where the traces
are sent (as messages) to be handled, etc. This tracing allows a wide
set of tools to be built: a bunch of profilers, debuggers, code
analysers, etc. They can all be started and stopped when you want, even
on production code, without a problem.

Erlang also has helpful applications such as a system-wide logger (which
can be extended and configured transparently), log viewer, process
managers and viewers, tools to see the process hierarchies currently
running, tools to monitor the memory used, ways to start remote nodes
programmatically, a structure to update entire systems without stopping
them from running, its own database, snmp integration tools, testing
frameworks and so on.

Then add the OTP behaviours. They are modules that define a generic and
well-behaved implementation of some known model (which most of us would
get wrong at first, frankly), which you fill in with your
application-specific details. The standard ones include generic
client-server models, finite state machines, event handlers, supervisor
processes, generic application structures, etc. Getting into the Erlang
land means you'll often have to write your own solutions to your
problems, but the whole framework and toolset around it is provided to
you and it can be a real pleasure to work with in the end.

There is also the question of interoperability: what happens when you
want to interact with other languages and applications? After all,
Erlang is mainly a server language and you don't really get to choose
what other software on the server is written in. Erlang has many ways to
interface with C code or other languages (or already built software):
[ports](http://www.erlang.org/doc/tutorial/c_port.html), [port
drivers](http://www.erlang.org/doc/tutorial/c_portdriver.html) (also
linked-in drivers), [C
nodes](http://www.erlang.org/doc/tutorial/cnode.html) and [Natively
Implemented Functions](http://www.erlang.org/doc/man/erl_nif.html)
(NIFs). Then you can add protocols such as
[erl\_interface](http://www.erlang.org/doc/tutorial/erl_interface.html)
or
[BERT](https://github.com/blog/531-introducing-bert-and-bert-rpc "As used by Github")
if you need more options

All these tracing tools, maintenance tools and generic behaviours are
there because the people in charge of Erlang/OTP understand what
real-world programming requires. They understand that no matter what
precautions you take, errors will happen and systems will need to cope
with it. This brings me back to my earlier point about dealing with
failure on top of preventing it.

### Error Handling

This is the core of it all. When you first hear about Erlang, you hear
about concurrency, actors, functional languages, scaling, etc. That's
what sells. You also hear about fault-tolerance. If you're like me, it
frankly won't mean much to you at first. It takes a while before you
explore all the fault-tolerance constructs of Erlang and you begin
appreciating them. It's not love at first sight, but an acquired taste.

Everything in Erlang was built for fault-tolerance, including
concurrency and distribution. You can read [The Hitchhikers Guide to
Concurrency](http://learnyousomeerlang.com/the-hitchhikers-guide-to-concurrency)
for short details on that. Concurrency and distribution can handle
'failure in the large' for you, and additional tools such as [failover
and takeover
applications](http://www.erlang.org/doc/design_principles/distributed_applications.html "Technical description")
help with this. You can also access remote nodes, redirect output, force
local and/or remote nodes to reload code without ever stopping its
execution, etc. But what about failure on a more granular level?

You might have heard of supervision trees. Basically, Erlang processes
can monitor other processes to know if and why they went down or if they
terminated successfully. They can also be linked to each other in a way
that says "Hey, I depend on that other process. If it goes down, I want
to go down too!", which helps limit how far errors can creep into your
system before they take over everything. This is done by stopping
whatever this part of the application was doing and restarting from a
known state. The restarting is handled by a *supervisor*. This practice
is generally known as *let it crash*. This is a bit weird at first, but
what this really means is *only fix the errors you know how to fix* —
the Erlang runtime is made to handle the other kinds of errors without a
problem (and they can even be logged for you automatically).

The other [and most amazing, IMO] aspect of using concurrent actors to
do error management is that it shifts the perspective of where
exceptions are to be handled. In most languages, exceptions are managed
from within the execution flow of the program (on the left on the
diagram below). The problem with this is that your regular code needs to
handle outstanding errors on every level or you just delegate the burden
of making things safe to the layer above until you end up having the
eternal top-level `try ... catch`. It's more complex than that in the
real world, but that's generally what it looks like. Erlang supports
this model too. However, it also supports supervision trees, which
change your program structure in the way shown on the right:

![a diagram showing the different error handling
models](http://ferd.ca/static/img/error-path.png)

What I meant with this diagram is that *worker* processes run code
normally, and errors are handled by the aforementioned *supervisor*
processes. This means that the burden of error handling is shifted from
being tangled with your standard and correct execution path to a model
where it is handled literally in parallel to it. This lets you organize
your code in a non-defensive manner while helping keeping it more stable
at the same time. Your correct code is more concise, easier to follow
and thus easier to maintain and simpler to reason about.

This is not to say standard exceptions are not an acceptable way to do
things. They're still pretty useful. However, there is more than one
class of error that can happen in software, and I think Erlang deals
with this beautifully, in a manner unseen by most languages out there.
In my opinion, this concept of supervision trees is what Erlang really
is about.

### Hot Code Reloading

This text wouldn't be complete without mentioning this. Server-side
software usually needs to run forever, without interruption. Web
developers are used to languages like PHP, Python, Javascript (with
node.js) and Ruby being able to handle large deployments without a
problem by updating servers one by one, until they're all running the
new version of the code. In many cases, this is a good and safe way to
handle things: queries come and go, are replied to quickly and the next
one will run on the updated version of the software. Hooray.

There's one little problem with this, though. What do you do when the
user's query can basically last days or weeks? Let's imagine an IRC
bouncer/gateway as an example. If you want to change some vital code,
you'll need to take a few servers down. User sessions can either be
migrated (which is painful and will require some very special code to
handle) or just killed. Whatever you choose, it's either going to be
painful for you or the user.

Hot code reloading done the Erlang way allows you to bypass that. You
can update code without ever stopping it or losing state. It just knows
that a new version of some module was loaded and switches to it
automatically, without interrupting the service. In fact, this is one of
the reasons why the guys from [IRCCloud](https://irccloud.com/) used
Erlang: they can upgrade entire clusters without ever disconnecting
anyone.

### And so to actually finish this damn thing

I love Erlang. There are many places where it is not what you need.
Mostly anything where the CPU is the biggest bottleneck is something I'd
think twice about before using Erlang. For other stuff, I'd give it a
try. The thing is, Erlang *the language* is alright. There are
inconsistencies here and there, records' syntax sucks (and the whole
syntax as a whole according to some), working with the AST is a dirty
job, etc. But it does the job and has very well defined semantics.

When I'm programming Erlang, I sometimes miss the speed of some
operations, the possibility to have real arrays. I miss native hashes. I
miss wide adoption and larger community support (although Erlang's
community is fantastic). I miss the ability to go open up any algorithm
book and not have to mentally rewrite it to work with recursion, single
assignment and persistent data structures.

However, Erlang *the environment* is excellent. Whenever I work in
another dynamic language, I miss Dialyzer. Whenever I work in any other
language, I miss supervision trees. I miss the great modularity of
lightweight processes. I miss the ability to easily have event-driven
code, where each actor acts like a tiny daemon waiting to be called to
action. I miss the concept of really distributed responsibility. I miss
the excellent OTP framework. I miss pattern matching.

It's not all great, not all bad. I do hope more languages will borrow
concepts from Erlang. It's not the end all be all, but it's a damn good
step and it's worth giving it a serious try.

-   [Fred T-H](mailto:mononcqc+ferdca@ferd.ca)
-   [twitter](http://twitter.com/mononcqc/)
-   [Learn You Some Erlang](http://learnyousomeerlang.com)
-   [RSS](http://ferd.ca/feed.rss)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://ferd.ca/an-open-letter-to-the-erlang-beginner-or-onlooker.html
