**Cookie policy**: This site uses cookies to simplify and improve your
usage and experience of this website. Cookies are small text files
stored on the device you are using to access this website. For more
information on how we use and manage cookies please take a look at our
[privacy](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/privacy-policy/) and
[cookie](/cookie-policy/) policies. Your privacy is important to us and
our policy is to neither share nor sell your personal information to any
external organisation or party; nor to use behavioural analysis for
advertising to you.

Agree

[![Claim a free 30-day trial to Times Higher Education
digital](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/Pictures/web/u/a/h/the-free-30-day-trial-summer-2014-square.jpg)](http://www.tslshop.co.uk/thed-tsl/thedoa65)

-   [Skip to main content](#content)
-   [Skip to navigation](#mainnav)

[![Times Higher Education](/magazine/graphics/logo.png)](/)

![Times Higher Education](/magazine/graphics/print_logo.png)

![image](/magazine/graphics/masthybrid.png)

-   Welcome
-   [Log in](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/log-in)
-   [Register](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/register)
-   [Subscribe](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/subscribe)
-   [Forgotten
    password](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/forgotten-password)

Search the site Search

-   [Home](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk)
-   [News](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/)
    -   [Breaking
        news](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/breaking-news/)
    -   [Politics and
        Policy](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/politics-and-policy/)
        -   [Employment](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/282.more)
        -   [Access and
            admissions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/287.more)
        -   [University
            funding](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/280.more)
        -   [Moocs, technology and new
            media](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/286.more)
        -   [Private
            sector](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/284.more)
        -   [Quality and
            standards](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/281.more)

    -   [Research](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/research/)
        -   [Research
            ethics](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/171.more)
        -   [Industry and
            research](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/177.more)
        -   [Research Excellence
            Framework](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/172.more)
        -   [Postgraduate and
            early-career](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/179.more)
        -   [Academic
            publishing](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/175.more)
        -   [Research
            councils](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/174.more)

    -   [World
        news](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/)
        -   [Europe](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/europe/)
        -   [North
            America](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/north-america/)
        -   [Asia](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/asia/)
        -   [Australasia](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/australasia/)
        -   [Middle
            East](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/middle-east/)
        -   [South
            America](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/south-america/)
        -   [Africa](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-news/africa/)

    -   [Interviews](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/interviews/)
    -   [Students](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/students/)
    -   [Internationalisation](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/internationalisation/)
    -   [People](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/people/)
        -   [Q&As](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/people/qas/)
        -   [Obituaries](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/people/obituaries/)
        -   [Careers
            intelligence](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/people/careers-intelligence/)

-   [Comment](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/)
    -   [Reader
        comments](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/reader-comments/)
    -   [Opinion](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/opinion/)
    -   [Columnists](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/)
        -   [Alan
            Ryan](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/alan-ryan/)
        -   [Christopher
            Bigsby](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/christopher-bigsby/)
        -   [Felipe
            Fern√°ndez-Armesto](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/felipe-fernndez-armesto/)
        -   [Kevin
            Fong](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/kevin-fong/)
        -   [Malcolm
            Gillies](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/malcolm-gillies/)
        -   [Sally
            Feldman](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/sally-feldman/)
        -   [Guest
            columnists](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/columnists/guest-columnists/)

    -   [Leader](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/leader/)
    -   [Letters](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/letters/)
    -   [From Where I
        Sit](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/from-where-i-sit/)
    -   [The
        Poppletonian](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/the-poppletonian/)
    -   [Podcasts](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/podcasts/)

-   [Features](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/)
    -   [Latest
        features](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/)
    -   [Features
        archive](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/features-archive/)
    -   [Essays](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/essays/)
    -   [World in
        focus](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/world-in-focus/)
    -   [Off
        Piste](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/off-piste/)
    -   [Culture](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/culture/)
        -   [Film](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/culture/film/)
        -   [Theatre](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/culture/theatre/)
        -   [Exhibitions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/culture/exhibitions/)
        -   [Television](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/culture/television/)

-   [Books](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/)
    -   [Books of the
        week](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/books-of-the-week/)
    -   [Textbook
        guides](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/textbook-guides/)
        -   [7 November
            2013](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/textbook-guides/7-november-2013/)
        -   [23 May
            2013](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/textbook-guides/23-may-2013/)
        -   [28 February
            2013](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/textbook-guides/28-february-2013/)
        -   [8 November
            2012](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/textbook-guides/8-november-2012/)
        -   [24 May
            2012](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/textbook-guides/24-may-2012/)
        -   [23 February
            2012](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/textbook-guides/23-february-2012/)

-   [Rankings](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/)
    -   [World University
        Rankings](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/2014-15/world-ranking)
    -   [World Reputation
        Rankings](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/2014/reputation-ranking)
    -   [100 Under
        50](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/2014/one-hundred-under-fifty)
    -   [Asia University
        Rankings](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/2013-14/regional-ranking/region/asia)
    -   [BRIC & Emerging Economies
        Rankings](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/2014/brics-and-emerging-economies)
    -   [Rankings
        news](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/news)

-   [Awards](http://www.the-awards.co.uk/)
    -   [THE Awards](http://www.the-awards.co.uk/)
    -   [THE Leadership & Management
        Awards](http://www.thelmawards.co.uk/)
    -   [THE Awards
        archive](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/awards/the-awards-archive/)
    -   [THE Leadership & Management Awards
        archive](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/awards/the-leadership-and-management-awards-archive/)

-   [Events](http://www.theworldsummitseries.com)
-   [Jobs](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_home.asp?navcode=200)
    -   [Advanced Job
        Search](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_home.asp)
    -   [My Jobs
        Account](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_myaccount.asp)
    -   [Jobs by
        category](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_seo_role.asp?navcode=2)
    -   [Jobs by
        location](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_seo_location.asp?navcode=90)

-   [Subscribe](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/subscribe/)
    -   [UK
        subscriptions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/subscribe/uk-subscriptions/)
    -   [European
        subscriptions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/subscribe/european-subscriptions/)
    -   [Global
        subscriptions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/subscribe/global-subscriptions/)
    -   [iPad/iPhone
        app](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.aspx?storyCode=2002923)
    -   [Digital
        editions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/subscribe/digital-editions/)
    -   [Back
        issues](http://www.tslshop.co.uk/index.php?cl=listpublications&channel=bi)
    -   [Sponsored
        supplements](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/subscribe/sponsored-supplements/)

-   [Contact us](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/contact-us/)
    -   [Times Higher Education submission
        guidelines](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/contact-us/times-higher-education-submission-guidelines/)
    -   [Follow
        us](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/contact-us/follow-us/)

-   You are here:[Home](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk)
-   [Features](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/)

Germany‚Äôs great tuition fees U-turn
===================================

13 February 2014

Could England force a similar reversal? Howard Hotson asks

![Female student leaning against
statue](/Pictures/web/q/b/k/female_student_leaning_against_statu_450.jpg)

Source: Getty

> England has the most extravagant provision of elite private schooling
> and some of the lowest levels of social mobility in the developed
> world

During the past eight years, university tuition fees were introduced
into most west German federal states. Yet in a few months, every single
state will have abolished them. These facts raise a series of topical
questions that cast current English higher education policy in a fresh
and revealing light.

Why did Germany introduce tuition fees in the first place? The answer,
in short, is that politicians favoured the idea. Self-styled
‚Äúmodernisers‚Äù had been advocating tuition fees since German
reunification in 1990. Cultural differences between east and west
initially hindered this plan, but the main obstacle was a federal law
banning tuition fees, which echoed provisions guaranteeing free
education in the constitutions of individual states. In 2005, however,
the Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe ruled that moderate fees,
coupled with affordable loans, would safeguard these constitutional
provisions. Within two years, a cascade of laws had swept through most
of the federal *L√§nder*. The attraction of shifting some of the funding
burden to individual beneficiaries was irresistible. So was the
compulsion to imitate the changes made elsewhere, lest universities in
one‚Äôs own state should remain less well funded, and the public purse
more stretched, than in neighbouring states.

Seven out of 10 states in west Germany introduced fees in 2006 or 2007;
an eighth, Bremen, was prevented from doing so by a lawsuit. Only two ‚Äì
Rheinland-Pfalz and Schleswig-Holstein ‚Äì resisted the tide completely.

If such unanimity had been maintained, policymakers would now be
declaring these changes inevitable. Yet within a single electoral cycle,
their long-sought policy was comprehensively overturned. The only state
still charging tuition fees in 2014, Lower Saxony, will cease to do so
at the end of this academic year.

This raises a second and more interesting question: what immovable
object blocked this seemingly irresistible force? The answer, in a word,
is democracy. In Hesse, for instance, students protested en masse, a
citizens‚Äô initiative collected 70,000 signatures, and the ruling
Christian Democratic Union party, fighting for re-election in 2008,
reversed course in order to retain power. Tuition fees then unravelled
at almost the same speed as they had been stitched up. Those state
governments that followed Hesse‚Äôs lead in abolishing fees stayed in
power; those that refused were removed from office at the next election.
The U-turns involved were often spectacular. The conservative prime
minister of Bavaria, threatened with a fee referendum, arm-twisted his
liberal coalition partner into abolishing fees. He survived the election
of September 2013 but his liberal partner, the Free Democratic Party,
having announced it would return with a better idea on fees, lost power.
In a few months, Germany‚Äôs brief experiment with university tuition fees
will be over.

[![Universities in Europe in
1650](/Pictures/web/d/k/i/universities-in-europe-1650-map-smal_450.jpg)](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/Pictures/web/h/o/c/universities-in-europe-1650-map-large.jpg)

Click image to enlarge - Note: Adapted from a series of maps published
in A History of the University in Europe, Volume 2: Universities in
Early Modern Europe (1500-1800), edited by Hilde de Ridder-Symoens
(Cambridge University Press, 1996).

A political narrative of this kind raises more fundamental questions.
Why did the German electorate react so forcefully to the imposition of
annual fees of ‚Ç¨1,000 (¬£824)? And why was their reaction so powerful
politically? After all, in the winter of 2010, English student protests
on a scale not seen for a generation were in effect ignored by
Westminster. Why was popular pressure more effective in Germany?
Sketching answers to these questions requires a far broader historical
canvas, for they are ultimately rooted in nearly seven centuries of
university history layered on top of German political geography.

For most of its history, Germany has been a federal entity. From the
late 14th century, many of the leading princes of the Holy Roman Empire
wanted universities of their own, not merely for prestige but to train
loyal officials and churchmen without draining resources from their
territories. The Reformation reinforced this tendency with theological
logic: clergy henceforth needed to be trained in the precise local
flavour of theology and church polity. By 1630, Germany boasted two
dozen universities and another two dozen sub-university institutions of
great variety. Within this crowded landscape, oldest was by no means
best. Instead, the process of university reform was typically driven
forward by new universities: Wittenberg, Halle, G√∂ttingen, Bonn and the
Humboldt University in Berlin, to name a few. In short, by the time the
third English university (University College London) was established in
1826, Germany had been peppered for centuries with dozens of venerable
institutions to which local populations felt a sense of pride,
connection and eventually even entitlement (see map, above). When access
to these local sources of cultural identity and socio-economic
advancement were threatened by the thin edge of marketisation, local
people rose up in opposition.

Political fragmentation also ensured that their voices were heard. After
the disaster of the Third Reich, Germany reverted to its federal
pattern. Education became, once again, one of the main responsibilities
of individual *L√§nder*. Higher education is therefore a prominent issue
in local politics, on which politicians cannot afford to ignore the
views of local people. So while long-established local universities
ensured that people had strong views on the public provision of higher
education, Germany‚Äôs federal system of government ensured that those
views were heard. In the event, traditions of local identity and local
democracy were powerful enough to triumph over the neoliberal
group-think of Germany‚Äôs politicians.

To the English reader, this combination of local universities, local
politics and the reversal of seemingly inevitable tuition fees may seem
like another world. But the same forces had produced the same result a
decade earlier much closer to home: in Scotland. Between 1412 and 1582,
this small and thinly populated country founded five separate
universities in the localities ‚Äì more per head of population than any
other country in Europe. Even after the merger of the Aberdonian
university colleges in 1860, Scotland remained dotted with ancient
universities as a source of local pride and identity: if Germany is the
land of *Dichter und Denker* (poets and thinkers), then Scotland is home
to ‚Äúthe democratic intellect‚Äù and the ‚Äú*lad o‚Äôpairts*‚Äù (lowly but clever
youth). When control over higher education devolved from Westminster in
May 1999, one of the first major acts of the new parliament in Holyrood
was to revisit the ¬£1,000 tuition fees introduced throughout the UK in
1998: tuition fees were replaced by a graduate endowment fee, which was
abolished altogether only two years after it came into effect.

The English case could scarcely be more different from the German one.
Here, too, geography is key. Thanks partly to its island location,
England unified early and then created by far the most unified system of
higher education of any major European country. Two universities (Oxford
and Cambridge) had a 600-year headstart on the others, piling up
historical associations, prestige, buildings, resources, a collegiate
structure and a unique pedagogical system, which make them different in
nature from all the others. England therefore lacks a cluster of ancient
local universities, providing a locus of cultural identity and
aspiration. The English can scarcely even speak of their other
universities without using vaguely disparaging categories such as
‚Äúprovincial‚Äù, ‚Äúredbrick‚Äù, ‚Äúplate glass‚Äù or ‚Äúformer poly‚Äù.

![Students at Humboldt Universitat zu
Berlin](/Pictures/web/u/l/x/students_at_humboldt_universitat_zu_berli_450.jpg)

Source: Getty

> The German people have chosen to maintain the tried and tested system
> on which, they believe, their current broadbased prosperity depends

The results of this historical legacy for England‚Äôs educational system
are profound, unmistakable and mostly regrettable. England has (after
the US) the most highly stratified major university system in the world,
the most extravagant and rapidly growing provision of elite private
schooling, among the most unequal distribution of opportunity, wealth
and income, and some of the lowest levels of social mobility in the
developed world, according to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development. And these problems are now being compounded by the
highest university fees by far of any public university system anywhere.
At the regional level, control over higher education is non-existent.
With no domestic basis for comparing different university systems,
policy is made on abstract, speculative and, ultimately, ideological
grounds. At the national level, universities fall far nearer the bottom
than the top of government priorities. The result is a huge democratic
deficit, in which politicians impose self-consciously radical policies
lacking clear electoral mandate in the face of popular opposition
without fear of effective resistance and the whole sector is manipulated
by private lobbying and special interests.

During the 2010 general election, Labour and the Conservatives famously
conspired to keep higher education out of their manifestos. And after
the election, the Liberal Democrats infamously betrayed their most
prominent manifesto commitment: to eliminate university tuition fees
altogether. No party had a democratic mandate for radical change, yet no
party seems prepared to challenge the changes that have been imposed:
the Conservatives because they favour marketisation in principle; Labour
because they are responsible for the economic debacle that provided the
pretext for change; and the Liberal Democrats because of their notorious
track record on this issue. If the changes imposed in this electoral
cycle are allowed to bed down for another one, they may prove
irreversible.

English politicians insist that they are only being realistic, that the
public funding of higher education is financially unsustainable, and
that the rest of the world will eventually be forced to imitate their
bold reforms. Yet Scandinavian countries maintain high-quality,
efficient mass university systems, like Germany, without charging
students, and so do the Dutch and the Swiss with tuition fees at a
fraction of the English level (see ‚ÄòUniversity tuition fees in Europe,
by country‚Äô table at end of article). How is this supposedly
unsustainable arrangement being sustained in Europe‚Äôs most economically
sound and successful countries?

Here, contrasting the recent economic history of Britain and Germany is
particularly instructive. Thirty years ago, the UK gambled its economic
future on the neoliberal promise of a new knowledge economy, in which
money could be made without making anything else. There was no point in
trying to maintain manufacturing jobs in the UK, our politicians
insisted: far better to adapt to the new reality and build a
post-industrial economy on a new model. For decades, Germany was treated
with disdain by the Anglo-American axis, which boasted that it had found
a new high road to growth. The bursting of the US housing bubble in
2007, the meltdown of the international financial system and the
revelation of deep-seated corruption in the financial sector has
silenced those boasts, and set the UK scrambling to ‚Äúrebalance the
economy‚Äù, that is, to reindustrialise more along the lines of the German
model. Germans, having resisted that neoliberal fantasy, can still
afford public higher education, and are entitled to a bit of
*Schadenfreude*. But having lost its gamble on the economy as a whole,
the UK government is now wagering the future of England‚Äôs university
system on another highly speculative neoliberal experiment. Trying to
maintain direct public support for higher education, our policymakers
assert, is futile: far better to adapt to the new reality (again) and
build a marketised university system on a new model. The Germans
contemplated this argument as well, and then rejected it decisively.

Hence the really crucial question: which country will prove more prudent
this time around? Once again, it will be 20 or 30 years before the
answer is evident, but a comparison of the ways in which these policies
have been arrived at, and of their intended consequences, is
nevertheless suggestive.

![University orchestra
playing](/Pictures/web/b/l/c/university_orchestra_playin_450.jpg)

Source: Getty

The German policy has a clear democratic mandate. The English policy,
equally clearly, does not. Do the English need to learn lessons in
democracy as well as economy from their German cousins?

The German policy is based on decades of experience. The German people
have chosen to maintain the tried and tested system on which, they
believe, their current broadbased prosperity depends. The English
solution is self-consciously radical and highly speculative: England‚Äôs
politicians are conducting an unprecedented experiment on one of the
world‚Äôs most highly regarded university systems without first studying
the plentiful empirical evidence that their key ideological assumptions
may be unsound. Do the English also need to relearn the virtues of
genuine conservatism, prudent empiricism and their traditional aversion
to ideologically driven radicalism?

The Germans aim to maintain a fairly level playing field by funding all
institutions roughly equally through progressive general taxation.
Equality of educational opportunity is designed to benefit their country
economically by nurturing talent and rewarding hard work wherever they
are found, irrespective of family background. The explicit objective of
the English experiment is to increase educational inequality by further
concentrating resources within an upper tier of elite research
universities. This will incentivise still greater investment by wealthy
parents in the kind of private schooling that provides advantageous
access to elite institutions. So the end result will be to distribute
lucrative educational credentials roughly in proportion to wealth, as
market principles require. With educational opportunity contracting to
the wealthy, and the hope of shared prosperity dashed, the ideal of
shared funding of higher education will soon appear odious and absurd.
To many in England, wealthy or otherwise, it already does. German policy
is therefore an act of faith in a future in which opportunity and
prosperity are widely shared. English policy is an act of despair, in
which the wealthy cloak the consolidation of their advantage in the
language of a ‚Äúcompetition‚Äù that they are favoured to win and a ‚Äúchoice‚Äù
that only winners can exercise.

Viewed retrospectively, 2014 may well mark a major fork in the road, in
which higher education policies were consolidated with profound
consequences for cultural health, social cohesion and economic
prosperity in England and Germany. For those who yearn for a Germanic
change of course, the idea that this case of English exceptionalism is
rooted in 800 years of political and intellectual geography is not
encouraging. But the German example does indicate the strategy that must
be adopted if this course is to be altered: the campaign against fees
must be fought out in the localities. If national parties think there
are no votes in higher education, individual MPs should be instructed
otherwise. That requires a campaign, coordinated at the national level
by the National Union of Students in cooperation with the University and
College Union, targeted at marginal university constituencies.

Such a strategy puts students back where they belong: at the heart of
the debate about the future of the English university system, rather
than as passive subjects of a fee settlement imposed precisely because
it affects future students, that is, those who are not yet old enough to
vote. Like it or not, it is today‚Äôs and tomorrow‚Äôs students who will be
left to pick up the pieces when the results of this radical experiment
become clear in 20 or 30 years‚Äô time. The final question, therefore, is
whether young people have the maturity and wisdom to foresee and help
avoid the outcome that their elders prefer to disregard. That‚Äôs a big
ask, but one to which their German peers have already responded. We‚Äôll
know the answer by the time the British next go to the polls in little
more than a year‚Äôs time.

![Medical students in lecture
hall](/Pictures/web/s/x/s/medical_students_in_lecture_hal_450.jpg)

Source: Getty

### University tuition fees in Europe, by country

Country

Proportion of GDP invested in tertiary education in 2010 ‚Äì public and
private

Proportion of GDP invested in tertiary education in 2010 ‚Äì public only

Tuition fees at publicly funded universities (¬£ per year, home students,
latest available data)‚Ä†

\*No data. ‚Ä† Year may vary. Source: OECD, *Education at a Glance*,
published June 2013, and other sources. Note: Figures from *Education at
a Glance* given in $. Other figures calculated in ¬£ and obtained from
universities and other sources. Figures on GDP predate England‚Äôs 2012
fee rise.

UK

1.4%

0.7%

Fees of up to ¬£9,000 in England, covered by student loan repaid on
graduation

Ireland

1.6%

1.3%

A student contribution of ¬£2,080. Tuition fees are levied but the cost
is generally \
met by the exchequer

Netherlands

1.7%

1.3%

Fees of around ¬£1,600. Average fee $1,966 in 2010-11

Italy

1.0%

0.8%

Fees average around ¬£1,000. Average fee $1,407 in 2010-11

Switzerland

\*

1.3%

Between ¬£400 and ¬£2,700 a year depending on university attended. Average
fee $863 in 2010-11

France

1.5%

1.3%

Start at around ¬£160, with higher fees for engineering (around ¬£500) and
medicine (varies). Fees ranged from $200 to $1,402 in 2010-11

Denmark

1.9%

1.8%

No tuition fees

Sweden

1.8%

1.6%

No tuition fees

Finland

1.9%

1.9%

No tuition fees

Germany

\*

\*

No tuition fees from 2014

[![Times Higher Education free 30-day
trial](/Pictures/web/s/h/c/the_subs_banner_feature_450.jpg)](http://www.tslshop.co.uk/thed-tsl/THEDOA75/?utm_source=THE&utm_medium=Features&utm_content=THEDOA75&utm_campaign=freetrial)

### Print headline:

Article originally published as: *U-turn of the century* (13 February
2014)

### Author:

Howard Hotson is professor of early modern intellectual history at the
University of Oxford.

Rate this article (4.52 average user rating)
--------------------------------------------

Click to rate

-   1 star out of 5
-   2 stars out of 5
-   3 stars out of 5
-   4 stars out of 5
-   5 stars out of 5

0 out of 5 stars

Readers' comments (5)
---------------------

-   [Nigel
    Thomas](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/nigel-thomas/2012437.publicprofile)
    | 13 Feb 2014 11:55am

    An excellent piece of analysis, flawed by one ill-thought-out aside:
    'Labour because they are responsible for the economic debacle that
    provided the pretext for change'. This is a myth, or at best a gross
    oversimplification. Labour's responsibility here is much more
    directly related to the issue at hand: they introduced tuition fees
    (and withdrew grants) following the Dearing Report, which opened the
    door and leaves them with no basis of principle on which to oppose
    further marketisation.

    Unsuitable or offensive? [Report this
    comment](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/reportToModerator?storycode=2011168&commentcode=197720)

-   [Simon
    Page](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/simon-page/2020978.publicprofile)
    | 14 Feb 2014 3:35pm

    It is not as if German universities were charging equivalent of
    ¬£9000 euros per year was it? Hence not a news even if one argues
    about dropping the principle of tuition fee charging.

    Unsuitable or offensive? [Report this
    comment](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/reportToModerator?storycode=2011168&commentcode=197725)

-   [Ralph
    Pseudonym](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/ralph-pseudonym/2023796.publicprofile)
    | 14 Feb 2014 4:59pm

    'That requires a campaign, coordinated at the national level by the
    National Union of Students in cooperation with the University and
    College Union, targeted at marginal university constituencies.' \
     \
    This grossly underestimates the extent to which the NUS is under
    labour party control. This was evident in the 2010 protests, where
    all the marches after the first one had to be organised without
    them. Not to mention the lamentable conduct of the NUS president of
    the time through the whole process. \
     \
    Labour don't want to abolish tuition fees, or to encourage
    extra-parliamentary modes of political mobilisation, so the NUS
    won't act on either.

    Unsuitable or offensive? [Report this
    comment](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/reportToModerator?storycode=2011168&commentcode=197726)

-   [![Fanis
    Missirlis](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/pictures/80x80/P/Journals/THE_WV3/THE/SITEUSER/2013/8/22/web/Fanis8.jpg)](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/fanis-missirlis/2001524.publicprofile)

    [Fanis
    Missirlis](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/fanis-missirlis/2001524.publicprofile)
    | 16 Feb 2014 2:52pm

    Thank you. Solid analysis well put. \
     \
    I was in G√∂ttingen, Germany doing a Ph.D. when they first introduced
    the 50 Euros fee. I campaigned German students - via a local Greek
    student organisation - warning that it would soon become 1000 Euros
    and bring about the disaster of approaching knowledge as a
    commodity. \
     \
    Not all is rosy on the other side. I quote from a recent message I
    received: "The [German] university is directed by the bureaucrats,
    who manage to block everything, and the scientists are treated like
    a lower class, especially if they happen to have been born outside
    of the national borders. It's sad to see how a university that used
    to be prestigious is going down in free fall." \
     \
    I now repeat Howard Horton‚Äôs question: ‚Äú‚Ä¶whether young people have
    the maturity and wisdom to foresee and help avoid the outcome that
    their elders prefer to disregard". \
     \
    I see a contradiction here. Instead, I suggest: the elders who can
    see should reach out to their audiences and take associated risks
    (i.e. receiving the wrath of the establishment). There are hints to
    that when suggesting UCU should work together with NUS. But, in the
    spirit of the author's proposals, let me also add: Colleagues who
    understand, reach out (= educate) your students. On all matters that
    are required to bring about a higher education. \
     \
     \

    Unsuitable or offensive? [Report this
    comment](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/reportToModerator?storycode=2011168&commentcode=197732)

-   [richard
    waltereit](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/richard-waltereit/589360.publicprofile)
    | 17 Feb 2014 11:22am

    The author makes a link between the reversal of the German tuition
    fee policy and Germany's apparent success as a manufacturing
    country. The recent English admiration for all things German might
    thus suggest that England should emulate German free HE. I would
    suggest, though, that this link is unwarranted. Germany's
    manufacturers may be world-leading but its HE is not. Germany's HE
    is appallingly underfunded and students are mostly left to their own
    devices. Smart (read: middle-class) students get what they need but
    many give up and drop out. Would you prefer to have a degree at 21
    while having ¬£40 debt or having no degree at 25 while being
    debt-free? I'd even say that Germany's HE is at least as socially
    selective as England's; free tuition doesn't change that.

    Unsuitable or offensive? [Report this
    comment](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/reportToModerator?storycode=2011168&commentcode=197735)

Have your say
-------------

Remember you need to be a registered THE member and [logged
in](/signin.aspx?navcode=26) to comment on stories. Please read our
[terms and conditions](/terms-and-conditions/) for posting guidance.

-   [Print](javascript:window.print();)
-   [Email](/sign-in)
-   Share
-   [Comments (5)](#comments)
-   [Rate](#ratingBox)
-   [Save](/sign-in)

-   [Print](javascript:window.print();)
-   [Email](/sign-in)
-   Share
-   [Comments (5)](#comments)
-   [Rate](#ratingBox)
-   [Save](/sign-in)

[Tweets by @timeshighered](https://twitter.com/timeshighered)

[Featured Jobs](%20http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_home.asp?navcode=200)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   [![%2fp%2fh%2fh%2fUCLAN\_144x88\_logo.jpg](/Pictures/web/p/h/h/UCLAN_144x88_logo.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120335)
-   [![%2fn%2fw%2fy%2fUni\_of\_Greenwich\_144x88\_logo.jpg](/Pictures/web/n/w/y/Uni_of_Greenwich_144x88_logo.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120125)
-   [![%2fy%2fv%2fh%2fCoventry\_144x88\_logo.jpg](/Pictures/web/y/v/h/Coventry_144x88_logo.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120662)
-   [![%2fp%2fh%2fh%2fUCLAN\_144x88\_logo.jpg](/Pictures/web/p/h/h/UCLAN_144x88_logo.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120336)
-   [![%2fg%2fn%2fd%2fLSE\_144x88\_logo.jpg](/Pictures/web/g/n/d/LSE_144x88_logo.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120597)
-   [![%2fu%2fk%2fs%2fUni\_of\_Aberdeen\_144x88.jpg](/Pictures/web/u/k/s/Uni_of_Aberdeen_144x88.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120638)
-   [![%2fo%2fn%2fq%2fBournemouth\_144x88.jpg](/Pictures/web/o/n/q/Bournemouth_144x88.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120620)
-   [![%2fm%2fa%2fn%2fNorthumbria\_Uni\_144x88\_logo.jpg](/Pictures/web/m/a/n/Northumbria_Uni_144x88_logo.jpg)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_jobdetails.asp?ac=120463)

[![Jobs](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/Pictures/web/n/f/n/search-higher-education-jobs.gif)](http://jobs.timeshighereducation.co.uk/jobs_home.asp?navcode=200)

Most Popular
------------

-   [Germany‚Äôs great tuition fees
    U-turn](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/germanys-great-tuition-fees-u-turn/2011168.article)
-   [Tory conference: 'Many universities aren't teaching anybody
    anything‚Äô](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/tory-conference-many-universities-arent-teaching-anybody-anything/2016082.article)
-   [No place for introverts in the
    academy?](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/no-place-for-introverts-in-the-academy/2015836.article)
-   [World University Rankings 2014-2015 results out
    now](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/world-university-rankings-2014-2015-results-out-now/2016100.article)
-   [University ‚Äòcold spots‚Äô mapped by
    Hefce](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/university-cold-spots-mapped-by-hefce/2016121.article)

Most Commented
--------------

-   [No place for introverts in the
    academy?](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/no-place-for-introverts-in-the-academy/2015836.article)
-   [Tory conference: 'Many universities aren't teaching anybody
    anything‚Äô](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/tory-conference-many-universities-arent-teaching-anybody-anything/2016082.article)
-   [A simple
    proposal](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/letters/a-simple-proposal/2015912.article)
-   [Joan of Arc: A History, by Helen
    Castor](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/books/joan-of-arc-a-history-by-helen-castor/2015837.article)
-   [Danny Dorling on education and
    inequality](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/danny-dorling-on-education-and-inequality/2015835.article)

[![Claim a free 30-day trial to Times Higher Education
digital](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/Pictures/web/u/a/h/the-free-30-day-trial-summer-2014-square.jpg)](http://www.tslshop.co.uk/thed-tsl/thedoa65)

### REASONS TO REGISTER

Registering with the *THE* website is quick, easy and free and there are
so many reasons to sign up...

-   Sample *THE* articles every month
-   Get your weekly higher education update in our newsletters
-   Debate the latest developments by commenting on *THE* stories
-   Set up your own job alerts
-   Save stories into your online library

[Register
now](https://secure.timeshighereducation.co.uk/registeraccount.aspx?navcode=27&utm_source=THE&utm_medium=ONLINE&utm_content=FOOTER&utm_campaign=registration)

[![Times Higher Education
subscriptions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/Pictures/web/l/l/s/times-higher-education-ios-app-250914.png)](http://www.tslshop.co.uk/THE/NYOFFER14/?utm_source=THE&utm_medium=ONLINE&utm_content=FOOTER&utm_campaign=subscription)

### GET 6 ISSUES FOR ¬£1

If you like what you‚Äôre reading online, why not take advantage of our
special subscription offer and unlock all of *Times Higher Education*‚Äôs
content?

You‚Äôll get full access to our website, print and digital editions, and
the *Times Higher Education* app for Apple iPad and iPhone.

\
 [Subscribe
now](http://www.tslshop.co.uk/THE/NYOFFER14/?utm_source=THE&utm_medium=ONLINE&utm_content=FOOTER&utm_campaign=subscription)

### Have you got an opinion?

Why not join in the debate at *THE* and give us your views and opinions
on what matters to you?

[![Times Higher Education
feedback](/magazine/graphics/footer.opinion.png)](/feedback/) [Send
feedback](/feedback/)

-   [How to
    advertise](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/how-to-advertise/)
-   [Terms &
    conditions](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/terms-and-conditions/)
-   [Privacy
    policy](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/privacy-policy/)
-   [Feedback](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/feedback/)
-   [Cookie
    policy](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/cookie-policy/)
-   [Help](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/help/)

-   Copyright ¬© 2014 TES Global Ltd.
-   [A-z subjects](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/a-z-subjects/)
-   [A-z
    contributors](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/a-z-contributors/)
-   [Previous
    issues](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/previous-issues/)
-   [Site map](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/site-map/)

Site powered by [Webvision](http://www.abacusemedia.com/webvision)

![image](http://tsleducation.112.2o7.net/b/ss/tsltescouk/1/H.24.4--NS/0?[AQB]&cdp=3&[AQE])

![image](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/988687886/?value=0&label=u9JVCMK2uQQQjty41wM&guid=ON&script=0)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/feature-germanys-great-tuition-fees-u-turn/2011168.fullarticle
