[igvita.com](/) **|** a goal is a dream with a deadline [about](/)

Rails 3 Asset Pipeline & Google Closure
=======================================

By [Ilya Grigorik](/) on **August 16, 2011**

![image](//1-ps.googleusercontent.com/s/www.igvita.com/posts/10/xrails3.png.pagespeed.ic.npOyESwan4.png)Rails
3.1.0 is on the horizon and the new Asset Pipeline is the king of the
show. If this comes as news, then make sure to check out [DHH's keynote
from RailsConf](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cGdCI2HhfAU), and also
read through the [excellent edge
guide](http://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/asset_pipeline.html). This new
release brings about some of the most developer visible changes in a
long time: it both makes the previously "stashed away" assets such as
Javascript and CSS first class citizens in our development workflow, and
also pushes us into the bold new world of
[Coffeescript](http://jashkenas.github.com/coffee-script/),
[Sass](http://sass-lang.com/), and many other similar tools. It's about
time!

Asset Pipeline & Preprocessing
------------------------------

Under the hood, there are two major components:
[Sprockets](http://getsprockets.org/) is responsible for all the asset
preprocessing, and there is an [additional
middleware](https://github.com/sstephenson/sprockets/blob/master/lib/sprockets/server.rb)
(mounted under `/assets`) which manages the actual toolchain. Hence, a
request to `/assets/application.js` will hit the middleware, which will
in turn invoke Sprockets, run the minifiers and compressors, and finally
return the Javascript file. Good news is, this is all basically
invisible.

Let's take a closer look at the default `application.js`:

    // javascript comment
    //= require jquery
    //= require mylib/stuff.js
    //= require_tree otherlib/

The goal is to enable Rails to serve a single Javascript file back to
our visitors. To accomplish this, we need to tell Rails which files and
directories should be included in the output. With that in mind, and as
you may have guessed, the `//=` comment is, in fact, a [special
directive for
Sprockets](https://github.com/sstephenson/sprockets/blob/master/lib/sprockets/directive_processor.rb#L103)
to include the specified file in the processing of the asset pipeline.
Just specify the files, or entire directories and the rest is taken care
of. CSS handling [is no
different](https://github.com/sstephenson/sprockets/blob/master/lib/sprockets/directive_processor.rb#L85).

Google Closure + Dependency Management
--------------------------------------

Turns out, [Google's Closure
library](http://code.google.com/closure/library/docs/gettingstarted.html)
has a similar, but different, built-in dependency management system:

    <script src="closure-library/closure/goog/base.js"></script>
    <script>goog.require('goog.dom')</script>
    <script>
      var newHeader = goog.dom.createDom('h1', {}, 'Hello world!');
    </script>

Closure's DOM manipulation (`goog.dom`) is an independent set of
libraries, which are loaded by Closure at runtime when we call
*goog.require*. Now, the dynamic loading is convenient in development
mode, but it would be both slow and costly in production! To address
this, Closure also ships with a [separate Python
script](http://code.google.com/p/closure-library/source/browse/trunk/closure/bin/calcdeps.py)
to preprocess your Javascript to generate the single asset file:

    $ closure-library/closure/bin/calcdeps.py -i hello.js -p closure-library/ -o script > hello-calc.js

In other words, the net effect is the same as that provided by the
built-in Asset Pipeline, but it requires manual intervention and third
party tools - **we can do better**.

Extending Rails 3 Asset Pipeline: Closure support
-------------------------------------------------

The great news is, Sprockets allows us to easily modify and add new
directive processors into our pipeline: there is no reason why we should
be limited to `//=` directives only! Closure's `goog.require's` are
effectively the same mechanism, hence we can extract these calls, load
the right files, and make Closure a first class citizen in Rails! To do
that, we can define a [simple Closure
Preprocessor](https://github.com/igrigorik/closure-sprockets/blob/master/lib/closure-sprockets/processor.rb):

    class ClosureDependenciesProcessor < Tilt::Template
      def evaluate(context, locals, &block)
        context.require_asset 'goog/base'

        data.lines.each do |line|
          # scan the JS file for goog.require calls
          if line.match('goog\.require\s*\(\s*[\'\"]([^\)]+)[\'\"]\s*\)')
            goog, mod, sub = $1.split(".")
            sub = mod if sub.nil?

            dep = [goog, mod, sub].compact.join("/").downcase
            context.require_asset(dep)
          end
        end

        data
      end
    end

[closure-sprockets](http://www.github.com/igrigorik/closure-sprockets/)
- Sprockets processor for Google's Closure tools

With that in place, we can [define a new
Railtie](http://www.igvita.com/2010/08/04/rails-3-internals-railtie-creating-plugins/)
to [register the new Javascript
preprocessor](https://github.com/igrigorik/closure-sprockets/blob/master/lib/closure-sprockets/railtie.rb),
package it as a gem, and we're in business! Add the gem to your Gemfile,
download the closure library, and you are good to go.

Rails 3 API's
-------------

The final
[closure-sprockets](https://github.com/igrigorik/closure-sprockets) gem
is almost trivial and is [even easier to setup within your own
project](https://github.com/igrigorik/closure-sprockets/blob/master/README.md).
Having said that, this is only true because of the extensibility
provided by both the Sprockets preprocessors and the Railtie integration
- **kudos to the Rails 3 team for putting together these great API's**.
Finally, thanks to [Josh](https://github.com/josh) for [hand-holding me
through the process](https://github.com/rails/rails/issues/2211) of
learning about Sprockets and the new Asset Pipeline!

![Ilya
Grigorik](https://1-ps.googleusercontent.com/s/www.igvita.com/images/35x35xigrigorik-small.png.pagespeed.ic._Nz4w6PPkg.jpg)**Ilya
Grigorik** is a web performance engineer and developer advocate at
Google, where his focus is on making the web fast and driving adoption
of performance best practices — [learn more](/), follow on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/igrigorik) (29K),
[Google+](https://plus.google.com/+IlyaGrigorik) (18K).

[View
Comments](http://www.igvita.com/2011/08/16/rails-3-asset-pipeline-google-closure/#disqus_thread),
share on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/share?url=http://www.igvita.com/2011/08/16/rails-3-asset-pipeline-google-closure/&text=Rails%203%20Asset%20Pipeline%20&%20Google%20Closure:&via=igrigorik),
[Google+](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://www.igvita.com/2011/08/16/rails-3-asset-pipeline-google-closure/).

### High-Performance Browser Networking (O'Reilly)

What every web developer must know about networking and browser
performance: impact of latency and bandwidth, TCP, UDP, and TLS
optimization, performance tips for mobile networks, and an under the
hood look at performance of HTTP 1.1/2.0, XMLHttpRequest, WebSocket,
WebRTC, DataChannel, and other transports.

[Read Online for
Free](http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000545?utm_source=igvita&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=igvita-footer)

© 2005-2014 Ilya Grigorik [about](/)[subscribe via
rss](http://feeds.igvita.com/igvita)

(function(){var
e=window,f=Math,g="round",h="performance";e.pagespeed=e.pagespeed||{};var
q=e.pagespeed;
q.getResourceTimingData=function(){if(e[h]&&(e[h].getEntries||e[h].webkitGetEntries)){for(var
r=0,s=0,k=0,t=0,l=0,u=0,m=0,v=0,n=0,w=0,p=0,c={},d=e[h].getEntries?e[h].getEntries():e[h].webkitGetEntries(),b=0;b

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://www.igvita.com/2011/08/16/rails-3-asset-pipeline-google-closure/
