-   [News](http://www.newyorker.com/news)
-   [Culture](http://www.newyorker.com/culture)
-   [Books & Fiction](http://www.newyorker.com/books)
-   [Science & Tech](http://www.newyorker.com/tech)
-   [Business](http://www.newyorker.com/business)
-   [Humor](http://www.newyorker.com/humor)
-   [Magazine](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine)
-   [Archive](http://www.newyorker.com/archive)
-   [Subscribe](http://www.newyorker.com/go/mobilefailsafe "Subscribe to The New Yorker")
    [Subscribe](http://www.newyorker.com/go/mobilefailsafe "Subscribe to The New Yorker")
-   Sign In Link your subscription
-   -   

[](http://www.newyorker.com "The New Yorker")

The New Yorker
==============

-   [News](http://www.newyorker.com/news)
-   [Culture](http://www.newyorker.com/culture)
-   [Books & Fiction](http://www.newyorker.com/books)
-   [Science & Tech](http://www.newyorker.com/tech)
-   [Business](http://www.newyorker.com/business)
-   [Humor](http://www.newyorker.com/humor)
-   [Magazine](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine)
-   [Archive](http://www.newyorker.com/archive)
-   [Subscribe](http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe "Subscribe to The New Yorker")
-   [Search](http://www.newyorker.com/search "Search")

[![image](//subscribe.condenet.com/images_covers/cover_newyorker_80.jpg)](http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe)

![image](/wp-content/assets/dist/img/cn-ecom/failsafe/NYT_global_headercallout_150x110.png)

[](http://www.newyorker.com "The New Yorker")

The New Yorker
==============

-   Sign in
-   -   Link your subscription
-   

-   [The New Yorker
    Store](http://www.condenaststore.com/~/new-yorker-store?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=SHOP&AID=1247905545 "The New Yorker Store")

-   [F](https://facebook.com/newyorker "Facebook")
-   [T](https://twitter.com/newyorker "Twitter")
-   [G+](https://plus.google.com/+newyorker/posts "Google+")

-   [News](http://www.newyorker.com/news)
-   [Culture](http://www.newyorker.com/culture)
-   [Books & Fiction](http://www.newyorker.com/books)
-   [Science & Tech](http://www.newyorker.com/tech)
-   [Business](http://www.newyorker.com/business)
-   [Humor](http://www.newyorker.com/humor)
-   [Magazine](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine)
-   [Archive](http://www.newyorker.com/archive)
-   [Subscribe](http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe "Subscribe to The New Yorker")
-   [Search](http://www.newyorker.com/search "Search")

#### [Annals of Linguistics](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/annals-of-linguistics "Annals of Linguistics") [December 24, 2012 Issue](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/12/24 "Published in 2012-12-24")

Utopian for Beginners
=====================

An amateur linguist loses control of the language he invented.
--------------------------------------------------------------

### By [Joshua Foer](http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/joshua-foer "Joshua Foer")

-   -   [](http://twitter.com/share)
-   -   [![image](/wp-content/assets/dist/img/icon/email.png)](mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20Utopian%20for%20Beginners&body=There%20are%20so%20many%20ways%20for%20speakers%20of%20English%20to%20see%20the%20world.%20We%20can%20glimpse,%20glance,%20visualize,%20view,%20look,%20spy,%20or%20ogle.%20Stare,%20gawk,%20or%20gape.%20Peek,%20watch,%20or%20scrutinize.%20Each%20word%20suggests%20some%20subtly%20different%20quality:%20looking%20implies%20volition;%20spying%20suggests%20furtiveness;%20gawking%20carries%20an%20element...%0A%0AContinue%20reading%20at%20http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/12/24/utopian-for-beginners "Email")
-   [![image](/wp-content/assets/dist/img/icon/printer.png)](javascript:window.print();%20return%20false;)

[![2012\_12\_24](http://www.newyorker.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/2012_12_24-200.jpg)](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/12/24 "Published in 2012-12-24")

[Table of Contents
»](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/12/24 "View Table of Contents")

[![Quijada’s invented language has two seemingly incompatible ambitions:
to be maximally precise but also maximally concise. Photograph by Dan
Winters.](http://www.newyorker.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/121224_r22980_g2048-320.jpg)](http://www.newyorker.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/121224_r22980_g2048-320.jpg "Utopian for Beginners")
Quijada’s invented language has two seemingly incompatible ambitions: to
be maximally precise but also maximally concise. Photograph by Dan
Winters. Credit Typography By AJ Frackattack

There are so many ways for speakers of English to see the world. We can
glimpse, glance, visualize, view, look, spy, or ogle. Stare, gawk, or
gape. Peek, watch, or scrutinize. Each word suggests some subtly
different quality: looking implies volition; spying suggests
furtiveness; gawking carries an element of social judgment and a sense
of surprise. When we try to describe an act of vision, we consider a
constellation of available meanings. But if thoughts and words exist on
different planes, then expression must always be an act of compromise.

Languages are something of a mess. They evolve over centuries through an
unplanned, democratic process that leaves them teeming with
irregularities, quirks, and words like “knight.” No one who set out to
design a form of communication would ever end up with anything like
English, Mandarin, or any of the more than six thousand languages spoken
today.

“Natural languages are adequate, but that doesn’t mean they’re optimal,”
John Quijada, a fifty-three-year-old former employee of the California
State Department of Motor Vehicles, told me. In 2004, he published a
monograph on the Internet that was titled “Ithkuil: A Philosophical
Design for a Hypothetical Language.” Written like a linguistics
textbook, the fourteen-page Web site ran to almost a hundred and sixty
thousand words. It documented the grammar, syntax, and lexicon of a
language that Quijada had spent three decades inventing in his spare
time. Ithkuil had never been spoken by anyone other than Quijada, and he
assumed that it never would be.

In his preface, Quijada wrote that his “greater goal” was “to attempt
the creation of what human beings, left to their own devices, would
never create naturally, but rather only by conscious intellectual
effort: an idealized language whose aim is the highest possible degree
of logic, efficiency, detail, and accuracy in cognitive expression via
spoken human language, while minimizing the ambiguity, vagueness,
illogic, redundancy, polysemy (multiple meanings) and overall
arbitrariness that is seemingly ubiquitous in natural human language.”

Ithkuil has two seemingly incompatible ambitions: to be maximally
precise but also maximally concise, capable of capturing nearly every
thought that a human being could have while doing so in as few sounds as
possible. Ideas that could be expressed only as a clunky circumlocution
in English can be collapsed into a single word in Ithkuil. A sentence
like “On the contrary, I think it may turn out that this rugged mountain
range trails off at some point” becomes simply “*Tram-mļöi
hhâsmařpţuktôx*.”

It wasn’t long after he released his manuscript on the Internet that a
small community of language enthusiasts began to recognize what Quijada,
a civil servant without an advanced degree, had accomplished. Ithkuil,
one Web site declared, “is a monument to human ingenuity and design.” It
may be the most complete realization of a quixotic dream that has
entranced philosophers for centuries: the creation of a more perfect
language.

Ithkuil’s first piece of press was a brief mention in 2004 in a Russian
popular-science magazine called *Computerra*. An article titled “The
Speed of Thought” noted remarkable similarities between Ithkuil and an
imaginary language cooked up by the science-fiction writer Robert
Heinlein for his novella “Gulf,” from 1949. Heinlein’s story describes a
secret society of geniuses called the New Men who train themselves to
think more rapidly and precisely using a language called Speedtalk,
which is capable of condensing entire sentences into single words. Using
their efficient language to communicate, the New Men plot to take over
the world from the benighted “homo saps.”

Soon after the publication of the Russian article, Quijada began to
receive a steady stream of letters from e-mail addresses ending in .ru,
peppering him with arcane questions and requesting changes to the
language to make its words easier to pronounce. Alexey Samons, a Russian
software engineer based in Vladivostok, took on the monumental task of
translating the Ithkuil Web site into Russian, and before long three
Russian Web forums had sprung up to debate the merits and uses of
Ithkuil.

At first, Quijada was bewildered by the interest emanating from Russia.
“I was a third humbled, a third flattered, and a third intrigued,” he
told me. “Beyond that, I just wanted to know: who are these people?”

In early 2010, he was forwarded an e-mail in patchy English from a
Ukrainian academic named Oleg Bakhtiyarov, who introduced himself as the
director of a recently formed institution of higher education in Kiev
called the University of Effective Development, and as a leading
proponent of a philosophical movement called psychonetics. When Quijada
Googled both Bakhtiyarov and psychonetics, he found “a sea of
impenetrable jargon” about “efforts to develop the human mind using a
mix of Western and Eastern ideas,” but nothing that made him suspicious
of the group’s motivations. The e-mail invited Quijada to participate in
a conference titled “Creative Technology: Perspectives and Means of
Development,” which was to be held that July in Elista, the capital of
the Republic of Kalmykia, a small semi-autonomous state in the Russian
Federation, situated on the arid western shore of the Caspian Sea.

“From our viewpoint, creation of the Ithkuil language is one of the
basic aspects for development of creative thinking,” Bakhtiyarov wrote
to Quijada. “One can hardly learn enough about the Ithkuil language from
the Russian scientific print editions.”

Ithkuil did not emerge from nowhere. Since at least the Middle Ages,
philosophers and philologists have dreamed of curing natural languages
of their flaws by constructing entirely new idioms according to orderly,
logical principles. Inventing new forms of speech is an almost cosmic
urge that stems from what the linguist Marina Yaguello, the author of
“Lunatic Lovers of Language,” calls “an ambivalent love-hate
relationship.” Language creation is pursued by people who are so in love
with what language can do that they hate what it doesn’t. “I don’t
believe any other fantasy has ever been pursued with so much ardor by
the human spirit, apart perhaps from the philosopher’s stone or the
proof of the existence of God; or that any other utopia has caused so
much ink to flow, apart perhaps from socialism,” she writes.

The first entirely artificial language of which any record survives,
Lingua Ignota, was created by the twelfth-century German nun and mystic
Hildegard von Bingen, who is better known for having composed what may
be the earliest surviving morality play. She seems to have used Lingua
Ignota for some form of mystical communion. All that remains of her
language is a short passage and a dictionary of a thousand and twelve
words listed in hierarchical order, from the most important (*Aigonz*,
God) to the least (*Cauiz*, cricket).

More than nine hundred languages have been invented since Lingua Ignota,
and almost all have foundered. “The history of invented languages is,
for the most part, a history of failure,” Arika Okrent, the author of
“In the Land of Invented Languages,” writes. Many of the most
spectacular flops have been languages, like Ithkuil, that attempt to
hold a perfect mirror up to reality. In the seventeenth century,
European philosophers like Francis Bacon, René Descartes, and Gottfried
Leibniz were fascinated by the ways in which natural languages clouded
human thought, and wondered if an artificial substitute could more
accurately capture the true essence of things. In the previous century,
Jesuit missionaries had brought back the first substantial accounts of
the Chinese language, and many philosophers were taken with the notion
that its characters signified concepts rather than sounds, and that a
single ideogram could have the same meaning to people all over East
Asia, despite sounding completely different in each tongue. What if,
they wondered, you could create a universal written language that could
be understood by anyone, a set of “real characters,” just as the
creation of Arabic numerals had done for counting? “This writing will be
a kind of general algebra and calculus of reason, so that, instead of
disputing, we can say that ‘we calculate,’ ” Leibniz wrote, in 1679.

Ithkuil’s conceptual pedigree can be traced back to Leibniz, Bacon, and
Descartes, and especially to a seventeenth-century bishop and polymath,
John Wilkins, who tried to actualize their lofty ideals. In his “Essay
Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language,” from 1668,
Wilkins laid out a sprawling taxonomic tree that was intended to
represent a rational classification of every concept, thing, and action
in the universe. Each branch along the tree corresponded to a letter or
a syllable, so that assembling a word was simply a matter of tracing a
set of forking limbs until you’d arrived on a distant tendril
representing the concept you wanted to express. For example, in
Wilkins’s system, *De* signifies an element, *Deb* is fire, and *Debα*
is a flame.

The natural philosopher Robert Hooke was so impressed by Wilkins’s
language that he published a discourse on pocket watches in it, and
proposed that it be made the lingua franca of scientific research. That
never happened. The language was simply too burdensome, and it soon
vanished into obscurity. But Wilkins’s taxonomic-classification scheme,
which organized words by meaning rather than alphabetically, was not
entirely without use: it was a predecessor of the first modern
thesaurus.

By the nineteenth century, the dream of constructing a philosophical
language capable of expressing universal truths had given way to the
equally ambitious desire to unite the world through a single,
easy-to-learn, politically neutral, auxiliary language. Solresol, the
creation of a French musician named Jean-François Sudre, was among the
first of these universal languages to gain popular attention. It had
only seven syllables: Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, and Si. Words could be
sung, or performed on a violin. Or, since the language could also be
translated into the seven colors of the rainbow, sentences could be
woven into a textile as a stream of colors.

Esperanto, which was invented in the eighteen-eighties by L. L.
Zamenhof, a Jewish doctor from Białystok, was by far the most successful
of a hundred or so universal languages invented in the nineteenth
century. At its peak, it had as many as two million speakers, and
produced its own rich literature, including more than fifteen thousand
books.

Two world wars and the ascent of global English punched an irreparable
hole in the Esperantists’ dream of creating a universal language. Like
every other attempt to undo the tragedy of Babel, Esperanto was
ultimately a failure. And yet, by some estimates, Esperanto still has
more speakers than six thousand of the languages spoken around the world
today, including approximately a thousand native speakers (among them
George Soros) who learned it as their first language.

John Quijada was born in Los Angeles to first-generation
Mexican-Americans and grew up in the white-flight suburb of Whittier,
where he attended Richard Nixon’s junior high school. His father, a
Yaqui Indian, was a printer who made the sale signs that hung in
grocery-store windows. At night, he painted landscapes.

Quijada’s entry into artificial languages was inspired by the utopian
politics of Esperanto as well as by the import bin at his local record
store, where as a teen-ager, in the nineteen-seventies, he discovered a
concept album by the French prog-rock band Magma. All the songs were
sung in Kobaïan, a melodic alien language made up by the group’s
eccentric lead singer, Christian Vander.

“For someone to actually get onstage and unapologetically sing these
gargantuan, operatic, epic songs, it made me realize, shit . . . I’ve
got to do this,” Quijada told me. At fifteen, he created Mbozo, the
first of his many invented languages, “a relexified generic
Romance/Germanic hybrid with African-like phonology.” Another one,
Pskeoj, had a vocabulary that was pounded out randomly on a typewriter.

Quijada enrolled at California State University, Fullerton, when he was
eighteen, planning to become a linguistic anthropologist. “I dreamed of
becoming the guy who goes into the Amazon and learns a language that no
outsider can speak,” he said. He spent hours in the library poring over
descriptions of the world’s most exotic languages, and becoming a
connoisseur of strange grammars.

“I had this realization that every individual language does at least one
thing better than every other language,” he said. For example, the
Australian Aboriginal language Guugu Yimithirr doesn’t use egocentric
coördinates like “left,” “right,” “in front of,” or “behind.” Instead,
speakers use only the cardinal directions. They don’t have left and
right legs but north and south legs, which become east and west legs
upon turning ninety degrees. Among the Wakashan Indians of the Pacific
Northwest, a grammatically correct sentence can’t be formed without
providing what linguists refer to as “evidentiality,” inflecting the
verb to indicate whether you are speaking from direct experience,
inference, conjecture, or hearsay.

Inspired by all the unorthodox grammars he had been studying, Quijada
began wondering, “What if there were one single language that combined
the coolest features from all the world’s languages?” Back in his room
in his parents’ house, he started scribbling notes on an entirely new
grammar that would eventually incorporate not only Wakashan
evidentiality and Guugu Yimithirr coördinates but also Niger-Kordofanian
aspectual systems, the nominal cases of Basque, the fourth-person
referent found in several nearly extinct Native American languages, and
a dozen other wild ways of forming sentences.

“Originally, I was going to get a Ph.D., when I was bright-eyed and full
of dreams, but reality set in. I was too poor to go to grad school,” he
told me. “I’d never heard of Pell grants or any other kind of grant, nor
did the idea of the government giving people money to go to grad school
ever cross my mind as something consistent with reality.” At the age of
twenty-one, Quijada walked in on his devoutly religious mother
describing him as “a good Catholic boy” to his uncle and aunt. “She was
totally misrepresenting me,” he recalls. “In fact, I was, at the time,
agnostic.” (Two years later, he declared himself an atheist, and now
considers himself a pantheist.) “At that point in my life, it was very
important to me that people understand me, and I felt that my parents
didn’t really understand me,” he said. After a subsequent fight, he
stormed out the door, and didn’t speak to his parents for five years.
Unable to afford school on his own, he took a job as a truck driver, and
then one at the D.M.V., planning to return to academia once he’d saved
enough money.

“For an eight-year period I consciously, through sheer will, did my best
to become a different person: that slick, yuppie man-about-town that I
always aspired to be in high school,” Quijada said. “But the victories
were all hollow and short-lived. Pretty soon I’m introspective enough to
realize this formula is shallow. At thirty, I renounced that other me
and I went back to being me.”

Quijada worked his way up to middle management at the D.M.V. in
Sacramento, eventually overseeing its Web site. “There were always these
incentives to keep grad school on the back burner, and then one day I
realized it wasn’t even on the stove anymore,” he said. Instead, Quijada
indulged his interest in academic linguistics by making an annual
pilgrimage to Cody’s, a legendary bookstore in Berkeley, to pick up the
latest titles. In his spare time, he continued to work on Ithkuil,
filling memo pads with notes on a more perfect idiom.

It was on one of those pilgrimages that he discovered “Metaphors We Live
By,” a seminal book, published in 1980, by the cognitive linguists
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, which argues that the way we think is
structured by conceptual systems that are largely metaphorical in
nature. Life is a journey. Time is money. Argument is war. For better or
worse, these figures of speech are profoundly embedded in how we think.

For Quijada, this was a revelation. He imagined that Ithkuil might be
able to do what Lakoff and Johnson said natural languages could not:
force its speakers to precisely identify what they mean to say. No
hemming, no hawing, no hiding true meaning behind jargon and metaphor.
By requiring speakers to carefully consider the meaning of their words,
he hoped that his analytical language would force many of the
subterranean quirks of human cognition to the surface, and free people
from the bugs that infect their thinking.

“As time went on, my goal began changing,” he told me. “It was no longer
about creating a mishmash of cool linguistic features. I started getting
all these ideas to make language work more efficiently. I thought, Why
don’t I just create a means of finishing what all natural languages were
unable to finish?”

Quijada wrote Lakoff an e-mail, introducing himself as “a great admirer,
reader, and fan,” and “humbly inform[ing] you of a project . . . which
you might, time permitting, find of interest.” He went on to describe
how his understanding of Lakoff’s groundbreaking work in cognitive
linguistics formed the conceptual basis of Ithkuil, and ended with a
personal note of affection. “As someone with a lifelong passion for
linguistics who, through personal/financial circumstances did not get to
pursue my dream of [a] career in linguistics, I am grateful [to] you and
your colleagues for fighting the battle for me, and I hope I live to see
the full flowering of the cognitive revolution in science you have
helped to start.” Lakoff never responded.

In 1997, when Quijada ran his first Web search for invented languages,
he discovered that his strange passion was in fact shared by others. He
found a newsgroup that was populated by amateur linguists from all over
the world, who were excitedly conversing about new ways of conversing.
“I was like, ‘Oh, my God, I’m not alone!’ ” he recalled.

These linguistic hobbyists call themselves “conlangers” (referring to
“constructed language”) and hold an occasional conclave called the
Language Creation Conference. It was at the second of those conferences,
in 2007, on the campus of U.C. Berkeley, that I first met Quijada. Amid
two dozen men and seven women dressed in kilts, top hats, and kimonos,
the quietly aloof Quijada stuck out like an umlaut in English.
Broad-chested and bearded, he sat by himself in the back row of the
auditorium, wearing a camouflage trucker hat, a brown polo shirt, and
cargo pants. “John commands respect,” I was told by David Peterson, the
president of the Language Creation Society and the inventor of Dothraki,
the language spoken by a race of pseudo-Mongol nomadic warriors in the
HBO series “Game of Thrones.” (Dothraki is now heard by more people each
week than Yiddish, Navajo, Inuit, Basque, and Welsh combined.) In 2008,
Peterson awarded Ithkuil the Smiley Award for the best invented language
of the year. “Few have or, I’m sure, ever will, produce anything as
complete and compelling as Ithkuil,” he proclaimed in the award
presentation.

Quijada appreciated the award, but he generally keeps a low profile in
the conlanging world. On the Facebook page devoted to Ithkuil, where
fans post translations of the Lord’s Prayer, and offer “Ithkuil Wisdom
of the Day,” Quijada lurks but never comments.

When I met him, Quijada was preparing to deliver a talk on the topic of
phonoaesthetics, that hard-to-pin-down quality which gives a language
its personality and makes even the most argumentative Italian sound
operatic, the most romantic German sound angry, and Yankee English sound
like a honking horn. He asked rhetorical questions of the audience, such
as “Should my language include diphthongs?” while offering advice like
“If you put front vowels in your language, nobody will take it seriously
as a language of Orcs.” His speaking style was confident and
professorial in a way that might have seemed arrogant were it not for
his frequent self-deprecation.

At the previous year’s conference, where Quijada had lectured on
Lakoff’s theory of metaphor, he had begun his presentation by speaking
sentences in six languages created by conference attendees. For most of
them, it was the first time they had heard their language spoken by
another human being.

Unlike earlier philosophers and idealists, who believed that their
languages could perfect humanity, modern conlangers tend to create their
languages primarily as a hobby and a form of self-expression. Jim Henry,
a retired software developer from Stockbridge, Georgia, keeps a diary
and prays in his constructed language, gjâ-zym-byn. If there is a god
paying attention, he is the language’s only other speaker.

Many conlanging projects begin with a simple premise that violates the
inherited conventions of linguistics in some new way. Aeo uses only
vowels. Kēlen has no verbs. Toki Pona, a language inspired by Taoist
ideals, was designed to test how simple a language could be. It has just
a hundred and twenty-three words and fourteen basic sound units.
Brithenig is an answer to the question of what English might have
sounded like as a Romance language, if vulgar Latin had taken root on
the British Isles. Láadan, a feminist language developed in the early
nineteen-eighties, includes words like *radíidin*, defined as a
“non-holiday, a time allegedly a holiday but actually so much a burden
because of work and preparations that it is a dreaded occasion;
especially when there are too many guests and none of them help.”

Invented languages have often been created in tandem with entire
invented universes, and most conlangers come to their craft by way of
fantasy and science fiction. J. R. R. Tolkien, who called conlanging his
“secret vice,” maintained that he created the “Lord of the Rings”
trilogy for the primary purpose of giving his invented languages,
Quenya, Sindarin, and Khuzdul, a universe in which they could be spoken.
And arguably the most commercially successful invented language of all
time is Klingon, which has its own translation of “Hamlet” and a
dictionary that has sold more than three hundred thousand copies.

The discipline of linguistics has a history of giving uncredentialled
amateurs a seat at the table. Indeed, one of the foundational linguistic
theories of the twentieth century, which came to be called the
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, was based in part on the work of Benjamin Whorf,
an inspector for the Hartford Fire Insurance company. Whorf never got an
advanced degree, but he took graduate classes in his free time with the
anthropologist and linguist Edward Sapir, in the nineteen-thirties, and
he devoted his leisure hours to the study of Native American languages.

Neither Sapir nor Whorf formulated a definitive version of the
hypothesis that bears their names, but in general the theory argues that
the language we speak actually shapes our experience of reality.
Speakers of different languages think differently. Stronger versions of
the hypothesis go even further than this, to suggest that language
constrains the set of possible thoughts that we can have. In 1955, a
sociologist and science-fiction writer named James Cooke Brown decided
he would test the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis by creating a “culturally
neutral” “model language” that might recondition its speakers’ brains.

Brown based the grammar for his ten-thousand-word language, called
Loglan, on the rules of formal predicate logic used by analytical
philosophers. He hoped that, by training research subjects to speak
Loglan, he might turn them into more logical thinkers. If we could
change how we think by changing how we speak, then the radical
possibility existed of creating a new human condition.

Brown never succeeded in creating more logical thinkers, and today the
stronger versions of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis have “sunk into . . .
disrepute among respectable linguists,” as Guy Deutscher writes, in
“Through the Looking Glass: Why the World Looks Different in Other
Languages.” But, as Deutscher points out, there is evidence to support
the less radical assertion that the particular language we speak
influences how we perceive the world. For example, speakers of gendered
languages, like Spanish, in which all nouns are either masculine or
feminine, actually seem to think about objects differently depending on
whether the language treats them as masculine or feminine; those
conceptual differences are maintained even when they learn a second,
non-gendered language, like English.

Quijada would endorse a weak version of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, and
the conlanging community includes some of the last true believers in a
strong version. After all, if our thoughts are necessarily imprisoned by
language, as Sapir-Whorf suggests, then the only sensible course of
action is to build a roomier, more lavish jail cell with all the
amenities an inmate could possibly desire—a new language that could make
possible new ways of thinking.

If you imagine all the possible notions, ideas, beliefs, and statements
that a human mind could ever express, Ithkuil provides a precise set of
coördinates for pinpointing any of those thoughts. The final version of
Ithkuil, which Quijada published in 2011, has twenty-two grammatical
categories for verbs, compared with the six—tense, aspect, person,
number, mood, and voice—that exist in English. Eighteen hundred distinct
suffixes further refine a speaker’s intent. Through a process of
laborious conjugation that would befuddle even the most competent Latin
grammarian, Ithkuil requires a speaker to home in on the exact idea he
means to express, and attempts to remove any possibility for vagueness.

In the original version of Ithkuil, the word *Ithkuil*literally means
“hypothetical representation of a language,” which reflects the fact
that it was never meant to be casually spoken. It was an attempt to
demonstrate what language could be, not what it should be. “The idea of
Ithkuil is to convey deeper levels of human cognition than are usually
conveyed in human language,” Quijada told me. For example, the phrase
“characteristic of a single component among the synergistic amalgamation
of things” is a single adjective: *oicaštik’*.

If that word looks as though it required extreme acts of tonsillar
gymnastics to produce, it is because no sound or syllable is wasted in
Ithkuil. Every language has its own phonemic inventory, or library of
sounds, from which a speaker can string together words. Consonant-poor
Hawaiian has just thirteen phonemes. English has around forty-two,
depending on dialect. In order to pack as much meaning as possible into
each word, Ithkuil has fifty-eight phonemes. The original version of the
language included a repertoire of grunts, wheezes, and hacks that are
borrowed from some of the world’s most obscure tongues. One particular
hard-to-make clicklike sound, a voiceless uvular ejective affricate, has
been found in only a few other languages, including the Caucasian
language Ubykh, whose last native speaker died in 1992.

On a warm afternoon in mid-July, I visited Quijada’s modest
three-bedroom home in suburban Sacramento, where he lives with his wife,
Carol Barry, also a retired civil servant. One set of bookshelves was
lined with dictionaries of Yoruba, Latvian, Basque, Hausa, and more than
three dozen other languages. Another was packed two layers deep with
science-fiction paperbacks.

Quijada turned on some Congolese soukous music, one of many genres of
world music of which he considers himself an aficionado, and pulled out
a copy of an unpublished science-fiction novel he co-wrote with his
identical twin, Paul, called “Beyond Antimony,” about the philosophical
implications of quantum theory. (Quijada and his twin communicated with
each other in a private language when they were young, a phenomenon that
is surprisingly common, and has its own name: cryptophasia.) In the
novel, Ithkuil is used as a “para-linguistic interface for an array of
quantum computers that are being used to create emergent consciousness.”

He opened a closet and pulled out a plastic tub filled with reams of
graph paper documenting early versions of the Ithkuil script and
twenty-year-old sentence conjugations handwritten in marker on a
mishmash of folded notepads. “I worked on this in fits and starts,” he
said, looking at the mass of documents. “It was very much dependent on
whether I was dating anyone at the time. This isn’t exactly something
you discuss on a first or second date.”

Human interactions are governed by a set of implicit codes that can
sometimes seem frustratingly opaque, and whose misreading can quickly
put you on the outside looking in. Irony, metaphor, ambiguity: these are
the ingenious instruments that allow us to mean more than we say. But in
Ithkuil ambiguity is quashed in the interest of making all that is
implicit explicit. An ironic statement is tagged with the verbal affix
’kçç. Hyperbolic statements are inflected by the letter ’m.

“I wanted to use Ithkuil to show how you would discuss philosophy and
emotional states transparently,” Quijada said. To attempt to translate a
thought into Ithkuil requires investigating a spectrum of subtle
variations in meaning that are not recorded in any natural language. You
cannot express a thought without first considering all the neighboring
thoughts that it is not. Though words in Ithkuil may sound like a
hacking cough, they have an inherent and unavoidable depth. “It’s the
ideal language for political and philosophical debate—any forum where
people hide their intent or obfuscate behind language,” Quijada
continued. “Ithkuil makes you say what you mean and mean what you say.”

In Ithkuil, the difference between glimpsing, glancing, and gawking is
the mere flick of a vowel. Each of these distinctions is expressed
simply as a conjugation of the root word for vision. Hunched over the
dining-room table, Quijada showed me how he would translate “gawk” into
Ithkuil. First, though, since words in Ithkuil are assembled from
individual atoms of meaning, he had to engage in some introspection
about what exactly he meant to say.

For fifteen minutes, he flipped backward and forward through his thick
spiral-bound manuscript, scratching his head, pondering each of the
word’s aspects, as he packed the verb with all of gawking’s many
connotations. As he assembled the evolving word from its constituent
meanings, he scribbled its pieces on a notepad. He added the “second
degree of the affix for expectation of outcome” to suggest an element of
surprise that is more than mere unpreparedness but less than outright
shock, and the “third degree of the affix for contextual
appropriateness” to suggest an element of impropriety that is less than
scandalous but more than simply eyebrow-raising. As he rapped his pen
against the notepad, he paged through his manuscript in search of the
third pattern of the first stem of the root for “shock” to suggest a
“non-volitional physiological response,” and then, after several moments
of contemplation, he decided that gawking required the use of the
“resultative format” to suggest “an event which occurs in conjunction
with the conflated sense but is also caused by it.” He eventually
emerged with a tiny word that hardly rolled off the tongue:
*apq’uxasiu*. He spoke the first clacking syllable aloud a couple of
times before deciding that he had the pronunciation right, and then
wrote it down in the script he had invented for printed Ithkuil:

![image](/images/2012/12/24/p100/121224_foergraphic_p100.jpg)

“Now imagine a culture where gawking is not only culturally appropriate
but laudatory. Ithkuil would have a word for that, too,” Quijada
explained. Having grammatically systematized all the many aspects that
turn seeing into gawking, he showed me how he could apply those same
grammatical transformations to any verb, so that one could open a door
or run to the store or throw a ball with all of the same nuanced
inflections of impropriety, surprise, and shock that transform a mere
look into a gawk.

“You can make up words by the millions to describe concepts that have
never existed in any language before,” he said.

I asked him if he could come up with an entirely new concept on the
spot, one for which there was no word in any existing language. He
thought about it for a moment.

“Well, no language, as far as I know, has a single word for that
chin-stroking moment you get, often accompanied by a frown on your face,
when someone expresses an idea that you’ve never thought of and you have
a moment of suddenly seeing possibilities you never saw before.” He
paused, as if leafing through a mental dictionary. “In Ithkuil, it’s
*ašţal*.”

In 2010, Quijada found himself in a position he’d long sought to avoid.
In order to get time off to attend the conference in Kalmykia, he was
forced to disclose to his boss and co-workers, some of whom had known
him for more than two decades, that he had been concealing a hobby that
had consumed his nights, weekends, and lunch breaks ever since college.

“People at work now held me in some sort of state of half awe, because
this guy obviously has more going on in his head than being a manager at
this dopey state agency, and half in contempt, because I’ve now proved
myself to be beyond whatever state of geekery they might have previously
thought about me,” Quijada said. “ ‘You’re a what? A con man?’ ‘No,
boss, a conlanger.’ ” He was being sent halfway around the world on an
all-expenses-paid trip, sponsored by a foreign government, to take part
in a conference whose docket of speakers included philosophers,
sociologists, economists, biologists, a logician, and a Buddhist monk.
Not only had Quijada never been to Kalmykia; he’d never heard of it
before.

To the extent that it’s known at all, Kalmykia is notable for two
things: for being the only majority-Buddhist state west of the Ural
Mountains, and for having an eccentric former President, Kirsan
Ilyumzhinov, an oligarch-turned-politician, spend millions of dollars of
his own fortune turning a dusty, forgotten corner of the Russian steppe
into the chess capital of the world. Ilyumzhinov claims to have been
abducted from his Moscow apartment, in 1997, by extraterrestrials, who
gave him a tour of the galaxy and taught him that chess came from outer
space.

Upon landing in Elista, Quijada was greeted by an interpreter and
whisked off to Chess City, a community of middle-class California-style
town houses built on the outskirts of town to host the 1998 World Chess
Championships. There he met a student, a young woman, who informed him
that a group of students at the University of Effective Development, in
Kiev, had been studying Ithkuil intensively for the past two years, and
saw it as an integral part of a psychonetics training program that they
were developing. Another student told him that he and his friends
regarded him as “a legend.” Quijada still had no real idea what
psychonetics was, or why the University of Effective Development might
be interested in it. He was speechless.

“You tend to think by age fifty-one that you’ve pretty much seen
everything life can throw at you,” he wrote later. “But from that moment
on, John Q. was through the looking glass.”

Quijada opened his presentation the next morning by showing an image of
Marcel Duchamp’s “Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2,” a seminal work of
Cubist painting, which captures a figure in motion with abstract lines
and planes. It’s not an easy work to describe in any language, but
Quijada wanted to demonstrate how one would attempt the task in Ithkuil.

He began with several of the language’s root words: -QV- for person,
-GV- for clothing, -TN- for an implement that counters gravity, and -GW-
for ambulation, and showed how to transform those roots through each of
the language’s twenty-two grammatical categories to arrive at the
six-word sentence “*Aukkras êqutta ogvëuļa tnou’elkwa pal-lši
augwaikštülnàmbu*,” which translates roughly to “An imaginary
representation of a nude woman in the midst of descending a staircase in
a step-by-step series of tightly integrated ambulatory bodily movements
which combine into a three-dimensional wake behind her, forming a
timeless, emergent whole to be considered intellectually, emotionally,
and aesthetically.”

That evening, following a series of interviews with the Kalmykian press,
there was a get-together of conferees in the town house in Chess City
where Oleg Bakhtiyarov, the professor responsible for Quijada’s
invitation to Kalmykia, was staying. The psychoneticists talked into the
night about their experiments in “deconcentration of attention” and
other techniques of spiritual self-development. But the more Quijada
pressed them for an explanation of their philosophy the more elusive it
seemed. Above all, he couldn’t quite figure out why they were so
obsessed with his language.

“I never did get a handle on what these techniques really were,” Quijada
recalled. He chalked up his misunderstandings to poor translation, and
decided that it would be impolite to voice too much skepticism. As the
evening unfolded, he found himself perched barefoot and cross-legged on
a sofa, with a group of young Russian students gathered on the rug at
his feet.

“I was surrounded by all these people hanging on my every word. It was
intoxicating—especially for a loner like me,” Quijada said. “For one
day, I got to play as an academic. I got to live this fantasy where I
took the other path in the garden. I got to see what it would have been
like if I had gone to graduate school and become a professional
linguist. The fates of the universe tore open a window to show me what
my life could have been. That night, I went back to my room, took a
shower, and burst into tears.”

In May, 2011, I accompanied Quijada on a return trip to the former
Soviet Union, this time to attend “SingEngineering: Ithkuil &
Psychonetica,” a two-day conference in Kiev that had been organized by
the University of Effective Development. The befuddling title of the
conference seemed to be a mistranslation of the Russian
*znakotehnologiya*, which makes only marginally better sense when
rendered as “Sign Engineering.”

We were picked up at the airport by Alla Vishneva, an attractive
brunette with streaks of bleached blond in her hair, with whom Quijada
had been exchanging e-mails and phone calls intermittently for the past
several months. Vishneva, a former professor of Ukrainian at Rivne State
Humanitarian University and a student of psychonetics, was the founder
of an Ithkuil study group in Kiev.

Quijada, who had been wearing a pair of Coke-bottle glasses and toting a
cane to compensate for a leg injury, sized up her metallic silver boots
and figure-hugging bluejeans and seemed taken aback. “What is a
beautiful woman like you doing teaching Ithkuil?” he asked.

Vishneva chuckled and returned the compliment in stilted English:
“Ithkuil is beautiful. It’s a very pure and logically constructed
language.”

Quijada turned to me in the back seat of the car, visibly giddy. “It’s
one thing for another conlanger to call your work beautiful, but for
someone halfway around the world with a million better things to do to
say that—you’ve got to pinch yourself. It makes it seem like thirty
years of slaving away might have been worth it.”

“We think that when a person learns Ithkuil his brain works faster,”
Vishneva told him, in Russian. She spoke through a translator, as
neither she nor Quijada was yet fluent in their shared language. “With
Ithkuil, you always have to be reflecting on yourself. Using Ithkuil, we
can see things that exist but don’t have names, in the same way that
Mendeleyev’s periodic table showed gaps where we knew elements should be
that had yet to be discovered.”

“She really understands my language!” Quijada exclaimed. He leaned
across the headrest and told Vishneva, who was sitting in the front
passenger seat, “I don’t know if you’re a saint or crazy.”

The conference was held in a Soviet-era high-school classroom, the walls
of which were covered in chalkboards and forest-green Naugahyde. Most of
the attendees were either students or faculty of the University of
Effective Development, but none of them, Quijada noted, looked like the
typical language geeks he knew from the conlanging community. For one
thing, they were more physically imposing; many of the men had shaved
heads.

Bakhtiyarov, who had just flown in from a conference in Egypt, delivered
the opening remarks. Wiry, with short gray hair and a dark mustache, he
carried himself with a studied calmness that came across at times as
diffidence. He explained to me later that he had begun his career as a
medical student at the Kiev Medical Institute, but was expelled for
distributing “provocative literature” on campus. In the late sixties,
the K.G.B. labelled him “politically unreliable,” and sent him to prison
for two years. When he got out, he switched to biology, and eventually
became a psychologist. In the nineteen-eighties, despite his history of
radicalism, he ended up working for the Soviet government on a project
to develop a set of stress-management techniques for cosmonauts,
soldiers, and other individuals in states of psychological extremis.
Those techniques form the basis of psychonetics, a quasi-mystical,
quasi-philosophical self-help movement whose goal is to develop
“technologies of human consciousness.”

After I asked several times for a demonstration of these technologies,
Bakhtiyarov pulled up a piece of software on his laptop. Half a dozen
colored circles were slowly bouncing around the screen like billiard
balls, shooting off in new directions as they collided with each other.
Bakhtiyarov instructed us to try to look at the screen as a unified
gestalt, instead of focussing on any individual ball. “Your attention
creates subjects and objects as it filters a stream of data,” he said.
“With deconcentration, we have no objects, just a feeling of everything
in a single integrated whole.” After a few moments, the balls all went
black, and we were supposed to keep track of their original colors as
they continued to bounce around the screen. It was, of course,
impossible. But, according to Bakhtiyarov, it is through exercises like
this that a psychoneticist can begin to access deeper layers of
intuition about the world.

Psychoneticists may be the world’s strongest believers in the
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. For them, language is a barrier that gets in the
way of a holistic perception of the universe. “A psychoneticist must
have nothing unconscious. Everything must be conscious,” Bakhtiyarov
explained. “This is the same goal as Ithkuil. Human beings have a
linguistic essence, but we are in a transitional stage to some other
essence. We can defeat and conquer language.” He sees Ithkuil as a tool
to bring all of one’s unconscious thoughts and feelings under conscious
control.

In addition to the University of Effective Development in Kiev, there
are psychonetics laboratories in Kharkov, Odessa, Zaprozia, Minsk,
Elista, St. Petersburg, Alma-Ata, Krasnoyarsk, and Moscow, where
practitioners try to find ways to access “deep layers of consciousness”
to become “more effective in business, increase willpower, creative
skills, problem solving, and leadership.” At the conference, Bakhtiyarov
announced that, beginning the following semester, Ithkuil would be made
a mandatory part of the school’s curriculum in Kiev and at satellite
campuses in three other cities.

One of the conferees, a graduate of the University of Effective
Development named Gennadiy Overchenko, explained that he had used
psychonetics to develop skills in a variety of disciplines where he
previously had no expertise, from chess to cooking to gouache painting.
He later told me that, after half an hour of meditation, he was able to
sight-read Beethoven’s “Moonlight Sonata” despite being a novice
pianist. “In the past two years, I have never fallen (including on ice),
and have not dropped or broken anything,” he continued.

Another conferee, Marina Balioura, described how, while under the
influence of psychonetic techniques, she could simultaneously write two
different sentences with each of her hands. A young lawyer named Ilya
Petichenko recounted an exercise that uses Ithkuil to “go into the field
of pure meanings.” His wife, Victorya, explained how psychonetics helped
her “just bounce off the floor with creativity.”

I glanced over at Quijada, who seemed to be amazed at how well the
presenters grasped the fundamentals of his language, and yet
increasingly flustered by their weirdness. The group had gathered to
discuss linguistic transparency, and yet the more the psychoneticists
described their interest in Quijada’s language the more opaque it all
seemed.

A gaunt man with closely cropped hair sat on one side of the room and
recorded the proceedings on a camcorder. He slouched in his chair,
showing only intermittent interest in the proceedings, until he came to
the front of the room to address the conference. He introduced himself
as Igor Garkavenko. Rather than hand his camcorder off to someone in the
audience, he continued to hold on to it while he spoke, pointing it at
me and our translator.

As he spoke, the translator whispered in my ear; Garkavenko spoke so
fast and monotonously that it was difficult to keep up. He mentioned a
recent stint in prison, described reading Bakhtiyarov’s book, “Active
Consciousness,” in his jail cell every day, and the transformational
effect that psychonetics had had on his political and philosophical
consciousness.

Near the end of his speech, the translator stopped speaking. The color
had fled his cheeks. “Do you realize who this guy is?” he whispered to
me. “This guy is, like, the No. 2 terrorist in Ukraine.”

A quick Google from our seats pulled up a news report with a photograph
of the man who was standing at the podium. Garkavenko, it turned out,
was the founder of a militant far-right Russian nationalist organization
called the Ukrainian People’s Revolutionary Army. In 1997, he was sent
to prison for nine years for firebombing the offices of several
Ukrainian political and cultural organizations, as well as the Israeli
cultural center in Kharkov.

I turned to my translator. “What in the world is this guy doing at a
linguistics conference?”

I leaned over to Quijada and told him what I had just read. We looked
around the room at the collection of young men and women in attendance,
and were suddenly struck by a question that probably ought to have
dawned on us earlier: What were any of these people doing here?

After the conference wrapped up, Quijada and I met over a cup of coffee
to debrief, and to try to figure out what we had just taken part in. We
ran Internet searches on Bakhtiyarov and Garkavenko, and, with the help
of Google Translate, we decoded some of their writings in Russian,
including a trail of Garkavenko’s anti-Semitic blog posts. “A
considerable proportion of the populace knows the role of the State of
Israel, and the élites related to it, in those disastrous processes that
the peoples of the former Soviet Union are now living in,” one of his
essays proclaimed. I read that one aloud to Quijada, who twiddled
anxiously with the strap of his luggage, a look of devastation on his
face.

We discovered that Bakhtiyarov, in addition to his work on psychonetics,
moonlights in politics. In 1994, he joined the leadership of the Party
of Slavonic Unity, a short-lived ultra-nationalist movement whose goal
was the reunification of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus into a Slavic
confederation that would also include Poles, Czechs, Serbs, Slovaks, and
Bulgarians.

In interviews, Bakhtiyarov talks of developing “intellectual special
forces” that can bring about the “reëstablishment of a great power” in
greater Russia, and give birth to a “new race . . . that can really be
called superhuman.”

An intellectual élite capable of seeing through the tissue of lies to
the underlying essence of things needs a language capable of expressing
their new way of thinking. Like Heinlein’s fictional secret society of
geniuses, who train themselves in Speedtalk in order to think faster and
more clearly, Bakhtiyarov and the psychoneticists believe that an
Ithkuil training regimen has the potential to reshape human
consciousness and help them “solve problems faster.” Though he denies
that psychonetics is a political project, it’s hard to uncouple
Bakhtiyarov’s dream of creating a Slavic superstate from his dream of
creating a Slavic superman—perhaps one who speaks a disciplined,
transparent language such as Ithkuil.

“When I get home, the first thing I’m doing is draft a letter to Dr.
Bakhtiyarov saying I don’t want to have anything else to do with
psychonetics,” a dispirited Quijada told me. “What if, God forbid, this
were labelled as pseudoscience, or some sort of cult? I wouldn’t want to
be complicit in that. To find out that, when all is said and done, I’m
ultimately a pawn for these misguided Nietzschean whatever-they-are . .
. it just turns me off.”

Quijada and I weren’t the only ones who had been using Google.
Garkavenko blogged his account of the conference on Live Journal and
posted the video he shot of me on YouTube.

“At the conference, there was one person . . . with an interpreter,” he
wrote on his blog. “To put it simply: he had Pentagon written all over
him. I don’t know, it was plain and simple, a stereotypical caricature
of the face of a government agent. . . . When he took the initiative and
asked a question, it was always exactly the thing that a government
agent would bluntly ask about.”

Garkavenko had also noticed the moment when my translator and I realized
who he was. “He changed right before our eyes. . . . It became clear
that he had met me on the Internet. Afterward, I found out whom fate had
brought. Joshua Foer . . . the well-known journalist . . . a descendant
of Odessa Jews who had once fled to the West, at an inopportune time for
them. Of course, they were confident in their intuitions. And how could
they over there ignore a phenomenon like Oleg Bakhtiyarov’s project?”

Releasing a newborn language into the wild, where it can evolve and be
corrupted in the mouths of others, has consistently proved difficult for
language creators. More than once, it has been accompanied by the same
sense of destructive disappointment that the Biblical God experienced
after he released his own perfect creations into the world and
discovered that they weren’t so perfect after all. Charles Bliss, a
survivor of Buchenwald and the inventor of the pictographic language
Blissymbolics, became unhinged when he learned that teachers were
modifying his language to make it a tool for children with cerebral
palsy to learn English. Volapük, a language created in the nineteenth
century by a German Catholic priest named Johann Martin Schleyer, once
had two hundred and eighty clubs around the world and more speakers than
Esperanto. But its audience collapsed when Schleyer refused to allow
anyone other than himself to coin new words.

Toward the end of the Kiev conference, one of the professors from the
University of Effective Development told Quijada that she couldn’t
understand why he had no interest in building a movement of Ithkuil
speakers and students. “Your language is taking on a life of its own,”
she told him. “You should become a part of it.”

“It’s not my passion,” Quijada told her politely. “It was a
twenty-five-year itch that I needed to scratch. I scratched it. If
others can pick it up and run with it, that’s wonderful, but I’ve
accomplished what I wanted to accomplish. You’ve shown me that you
understand my work far better than I would have thought other persons
could understand it. Indeed, perhaps you understand its potential better
than I do.”

A few months after returning from Kiev, Quijada finally had the
opportunity to meet George Lakoff, at his home in Berkeley. Lakoff was
laid out on his sofa after a back operation that kept him from going in
to work. At my urging, he had agreed to see Quijada.

As we walked up the front-yard path to the house, Quijada was as
adrenalized as I’d ever seen him. “This is one more step in the
adventure, I guess,” he said.

Lakoff’s wife opened the door and escorted us to the living room.

“Why me?” Lakoff asked Quijada, from his spot on the couch.

“Because you’re my hero,” he said.

Lakoff, who is seventy-one, bearded, and, like Quijada, broadly built,
seemed to have read a fair portion of the Ithkuil manuscript and
familiarized himself with the language’s nuances.

“There are a whole lot of questions I have about this,” he told Quijada,
and then explained how he felt Quijada had misread his work on metaphor.
“Metaphors don’t just show up in language,” he said. “The metaphor isn’t
in the word, it’s in the idea,” and it can’t be wished away with
grammar.

“For me, as a linguist looking at this, I have to say, ‘O.K., this isn’t
going to be used.’ It has an assumption of efficiency that really isn’t
efficient, given how the brain works. It misses the metaphor stuff. But
the parts that are successful are really nontrivial. This may be an
impossible language,” he said. “But if you think of it as a
conceptual-art project I think it’s fascinating.”

In the months that I’d known him, Quijada had compared himself to a
painter several times, and spoken often of the impulse to create, but
this was the first time I’d heard him or anyone refer to Ithkuil simply
as a work of art. And yet that description of his project seemed to sit
better with Quijada than any other set of words that anyone else had
used to describe it.

“If linguistics is the best window into the mind that we have, why
wouldn’t you want to manipulate it for artistic purposes?” he said to
Lakoff.

“The beauty of this for me is that you went through the world’s
languages and collected all these features, as if to say, Look at what
human language is capable of. I say, bless you!” Lakoff told him. The
meeting lasted almost five hours.

When Quijada returned home, he made a final set of tweaks to the Ithkuil
grammar, and declared his thirty-four-year project complete. Then he
self-published a definitive, four-hundred-and-thirty-nine-page
description of the language. Though he dedicated the book to Alla
Vishneva, he politely declined Bakhtiyarov’s invitation to speak at
another conference, in Moscow.

Once the deflation of Kiev and the excitement of the meeting with Lakoff
had worn off, I wrote to Quijada and asked if there might be a brief
phrase in Ithkuil to summarize the journey that he and his language have
taken during the past year. He sent me a sentence: “*Eipkalindhöll te
uvölîlpa ípçatörza üxt rî’ekçuöbös abzeik^h^ouxhtoù eqarpaň
dhai’eickòbüm öt eužmackûnáň xhai’ékc’oxtîmmalt te q^h^oec
îtyatuit^h^aň*.” “I am privileged to have had the rare experience of
having what I think of as a hobby propel me to faraway places where one
encounters new ideas along with new cultures and new peoples generous in
their hospitality and respect, leading me to humble introspection and a
new appreciation for the human spirit and the wonders of the world.”

Of course, that’s not quite right, either. ♦

-   -   [](http://twitter.com/share)
-   -   [![image](/wp-content/assets/dist/img/icon/email.png)](mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20Utopian%20for%20Beginners&body=There%20are%20so%20many%20ways%20for%20speakers%20of%20English%20to%20see%20the%20world.%20We%20can%20glimpse,%20glance,%20visualize,%20view,%20look,%20spy,%20or%20ogle.%20Stare,%20gawk,%20or%20gape.%20Peek,%20watch,%20or%20scrutinize.%20Each%20word%20suggests%20some%20subtly%20different%20quality:%20looking%20implies%20volition;%20spying%20suggests%20furtiveness;%20gawking%20carries%20an%20element...%0A%0AContinue%20reading%20at%20http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/12/24/utopian-for-beginners "Email")
-   [![image](/wp-content/assets/dist/img/icon/printer.png)](javascript:window.print();%20return%20false;)

**Joshua Foer**

-   [Bio](http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/joshua-foer "Joshua Foer")
-   [All
    work](http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/joshua-foer/all "Joshua Foer")

&

##### Sign up to get the best of The New Yorker delivered to your inbox every day

##### Sign up for newsletters

E-mail address Sign up

-   -   -   -   

##### Most Popular

1.  [Country Music’s Taylor Swift
    Problem](//www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/country-music-shakes-taylor-swift?src=mp)

    ### By Kelefa Sanneh

2.  [The Men Who Killed James
    Foley](//www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/men-killed-james-foley?src=mp)

    ### By Jon Lee Anderson

3.  [Hillary Clinton’s New Iraq
    Gamble](//www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/hillary-clintons-new-iraq-gamble?src=mp)

    ### By Nicholas Lemann

4.  [Daily Cartoon: Thursday, August
    21st](//www.newyorker.com/cartoons/daily-cartoon/daily-cartoon-thursday-august-21st-ice-bucket?src=mp)

    ### By Benjamin Schwartz

5.  [Drawing a Gun in
    Ferguson](//www.newyorker.com/news/amy-davidson/drawing-gun-ferguson?src=mp)

    ### By Amy Davidson

##### You Might Like

-   ##### [Jigsaw Puzzle](/jigsaw)

    [![Jigsaw
    Puzzle](/wp-content/assets/img/promotions/jigsaw.png)](/jigsaw)

-   ##### [Strongbox Submissions](https://projects.newyorker.com/strongbox/)

    [![Strongbox](/wp-content/assets/img/promotions/strongbox.png)](https://projects.newyorker.com/strongbox/)

-   ##### [Goings On App](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/goings-on-the-new-yorker/id452137683?mt=8)

    [![Goings On
    App](/wp-content/assets/img/promotions/tny-goat.jpg)](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/goings-on-the-new-yorker/id452137683?mt=8)

-   ##### [About Us](/about/us)

    [![About
    Us](/wp-content/assets/img/promotions/tnr-digital.png)](/about/us)

-   ##### [Caption Contest](http://contest.newyorker.com/)

    [![Caption
    Contest](/wp-content/assets/img/promotions/caption-contest.png)](http://contest.newyorker.com/)

-   ##### [The New Yorker Festival](/festival/)

    [![The New Yorker
    Festival](/wp-content/assets/img/promotions/tnr-festival.png)](/festival/)

[✕](# "Close")

The New Yorker Strongbox
========================

\

Strongbox is a new way for you to share information, messages, and files
with our writers and editors and is designed to provide you with a
greater degree of anonymity and security than afforded by conventional
e-mail.

To help protect your anonymity, Strongbox is only accessible using the
Tor network (**https://www.torproject.org**). When using Strongbox,
[*The New Yorker*](http://www.newyorker.com "The New Yorker") will not
record your I.P. address or information about your browser, computer, or
operating system, nor will we embed third-party content or deliver
cookies to your browser.

You can read our full privacy promise
[here](#strongbox-privacy-promise).

*The New Yorker* Strongbox is powered by
[SecureDrop](https://pressfreedomfoundation.org/securedrop "SecureDrop").

To get to Strongbox and begin using it to contact writers and editors at *The New Yorker*, just follow **these two steps**:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  *1*Download and install software to access the Tor Project:
    **https://www.torproject.org**. This should only take a few minutes.
2.  *2*Once you have access to the Tor network, go to Strongbox at
    **http://strngbxhwyuu37a3.onion**, where you will find further
    instructions on how to submit files and messages to *The New
    Yorker*.

You will be assigned a randomly generated and unique code name as part
of the process. If a writer or editor at [*The New
Yorker*](http://www.newyorker.com "The New Yorker") wants to contact you
about the information you have submitted, he or she will leave a message
for you in Strongbox. These messages are the only way we will be able to
reach you, and this message can only be accessed using your code name.

### Our privacy promise

[*The New Yorker's*](http://www.newyorker.com "The New Yorker")
Strongbox is designed to let you communicate with our writers and
editors with greater anonymity and security than afforded by
conventional e-mail.

When you visit or use our public Strongbox server at
*http://strngbxhwyuu37a3.onion*, [*The New
Yorker*](http://www.newyorker.com "The New Yorker") and our parent
company, Condé Nast, will not record your I.P. address or information
about your browser, computer, or operating system, nor will we embed
third-party content or deliver cookies to your browser.

Strongbox servers are under the physical control of [*The New
Yorker*](http://www.newyorker.com "The New Yorker") and Condé Nast.

Strongbox is designed to be accessed only through a “hidden service” on
the Tor anonymity network, which is set up to conceal both your online
and physical location from us and to offer full end-to-end encryption
for your communications with us. This provides a higher level of
security and anonymity in your communication with us than afforded by
standard e-mail or unencrypted Web forms. Strongbox does not provide
perfect security. Among other risks, if you share your unique code name,
or if your computer is compromised, any activities, including
communications through Strongbox, should be considered compromised as
well.

The system is provided on an “as is” basis, with no warranties or
representations, and any use of it is at the user's own risk.

[](http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe)

-   []()
-   [About Us](/about/us/?src=tny-footer "About Us")
-   [FAQ](/about/faq/?src=tny-footer "Frequently Asked Questions")
-   [Customer
    Care](http://w1.buysub.com/servlet/CSGateway?cds_mag_code=NYR "Customer Care")
-   [Cartoon
    Bank](http://www.condenaststore.com/-se/cartoonbank.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=tny-footer&AID=1247905545)
-   [On The Town](http://www.newyorkeronthetown.com/?src=tny-footer)
-   [RSS](/about/feeds/?src=tny-footer)
-   [Contact Us](/about/contact/?src=tny-footer)

-   [The New Yorker
    Store](http://www.condenaststore.com/-se/newyorkerstore.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=tny-footer&AID=1247905545)
-   [Careers](http://www.condenast.com/careers?src=tny-footer)
-   [Reprints/Permissions](http://www.condenast.com/reprints-permissions?src=tny-footer)
-   [Press](/about/press/?src=tny-footer "Press Center")
-   [The New Yorker Media
    Kit](http://www.condenast.com/brands/new-yorker/media-kit/?src=tny-footer)

[Condé Nast
Digital](http://www.condenast.com?src=tny-footer "Condé Nast Digital")

Subscribe to a magazine View All Titles - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Allure Architectural Digest Bon Appétit Brides Condé Nast Traveler
Details Glamour Golf Digest Golf World GQ Lucky Self Teen Vogue The New
Yorker Vanity Fair Vogue W Wired

Other Condé Nast sites - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Allure Architectural
Digest Ars Technica Bon Appétit Brides.com Condé Nast Traveler Concierge
Details Epicurious Glamour Golf Digest Golf World GQ Hotel Chatter
Jaunted Lucky NutritionData Reddit The Scene Self Style Teen Vogue
Vanity Fair Vegas Chatter Vogue W Wired

Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our [User
Agreement](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy) (effective January
1, 2014) and [Privacy
Policy](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy)
(effective January 1, 2014). [Your California Privacy
Rights](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-california)
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed,
transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written
permission of Condé Nast. [Ad Choices ![Ad
Choices](/wp-content/assets/dist/img/icon/ad_choices_arrow.png)](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-optout)

[![image](http://condenast.112.2o7.net/b/ss/conde-newyorker/1/H.15.1--NS/0)](http://www.omniture.com "Web Analytics")

[![Subscribe to The New
Yorker](/wp-content/assets/dist/img/cn-ecom/failsafe/NYR_Search_Tablet_300x250.jpg)](http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/12/24/utopian-for-beginners
