Hackery, Math & Design
======================

[Steven Wittens i](/about/)
---------------------------

[](/)

Home

[](#)

![Shadow DOM](/files/shadowdom/cover.jpg)

March 24, 2014

Shadow DOM
==========

SVG, CSS, React and Angular
---------------------------

For a while now I've been working on MathBox 2. I want to have an
environment where you take a bunch of mathematical legos, bind them to
data models, draw them, and modify them interactively at scale.
Preferably in a web browser.

Unfortunately HTML is crufty, CSS is annoying and the DOM's unwieldy.
Hence we now have libraries like
[React](http://facebook.github.io/react/). It creates its own virtual
DOM just to be able to manipulate the real one—the Agile Bureaucracy
design pattern.

The more we can avoid the DOM, the better. But why? And can we fix it?

![Netscape](http://acko.net/files/shadowdom/banner.jpg)

![Star](http://acko.net/files/shadowdom/star.svg)

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
    <!DOCTYPE svg PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD SVG 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG/1.1/DTD/svg11.dtd">
    <svg version="1.1" id="Layer_1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" x="0px" y="0px"
      width="400px" height="400px" viewBox="0 0 400 400" enable-background="new 0 0 400 400" xml:space="preserve">
      <polygon fill="#FDBD10" stroke="#BE1E2D" stroke-width="3" stroke-miterlimit="10" points="357.803,105.593 276.508,202.82 
        343.855,310.18 226.266,262.91 144.973,360.139 153.592,233.697 36.002,186.426 158.918,155.551 167.538,29.109 234.885,136.469 "/>
      <polygon fill="#FDEB10" points="326.982,114.932 259.695,195.408 315.441,284.271 218.109,245.146 150.821,325.623 157.955,220.966 
        60.625,181.838 162.364,156.283 169.499,51.625 225.242,140.488 "/>
    </svg>

Dangling Nodes
--------------

Take SVG. Each XML tag is a graphical shape or instruction. Like all
XML, the data has to be serialized into tags with attributes made of
strings. Large data sets turn into long string attributes to be parsed.
Large collections of stuff turn into many separate tags to be iterated
over. Neither is really desirable.

It only represents basic operations, so all serious prep work has to be
done by the user up front. This is what D3 is used for, generating and
managing more complex mappings for you.

When you put SVG into HTML, each element becomes a full DOM node. A
simple `<tag>` with attributes is now a colossal binding between HTML,
JS, CSS and native. It's a JavaScript object that pretends to be an XML
tag, embedded inside a layout model that takes years to understand
fully.

Its namespace mixes metadata with page layout, getters and setters with
plain properties, native methods with JS, string shorthands with nested
objects, and so on. Guess how many properties the DOM Node Object
actually has in total? We'll be generous and count `style` as one.

A hundred is not even close. A plain `<div>` doesn't fare much better.
Just serializing a chunk of DOM back into its constituent XML is a
tricky task once you get into fun stuff like namespaces. Nothing in the
DOM is as simple as `JSON.stringify`. Why does my polygon have a base
URI?

We have all these awesome dev tools now, yet we're using them to teach a
terrible model to people who don't know any better.

![SVG in DOM](http://acko.net/files/shadowdom/svg-in-dom.png)

DOM Shader
----------

In contrast, there's [Angular](http://angularjs.org/). I like it because
they've pulled off a very neat trick: convincing people to adopt a whole
new DOM by disguising it as HTML.

    <body ng-controller="PhoneListCtrl">
      <ul>
        <li ng-repeat="phone in phones">
          {{phone.name}}
          <p>{{phone.snippet}}</p>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </body>

When you use `<input ng-model="foo">` or `<my-directive>`, you're
creating a controller and a scope, entirely separate from the DOM, with
their own rules and chain of inheritance. The pseudo-HTML in the source
code is merely an initial definition, most of it inert to the browser.
Angular parses it out and replaces much of it.

Like React, the browser's live DOM is subsumed and used as a sort of
*render tree*, a generic canvas to be cleverly manipulated to match a
given set of views. The real *view tree* hides in the shadows of JS,
where controllers operate on scopes. They only use the DOM to find each
other on creation, and then communicate directly. The DOM is mostly
there to trigger events, do layout and look pretty. Form controls are
the one exception.

![SVG in CSS](http://acko.net/files/shadowdom/svg-in-css.png)

It's a bad fit because the DOM was built for text markup and there's
tons of baggage in the form of inline spans, floats, alignment,
indentation, etc. Most of these are layout systems disguised as
typography, of which CSS now has several.

The whole idea of cascading styles is suspect. In reality, most styles
don't actually cascade: paddings and backgrounds are set on individual
elements. The inherited ones are almost all about typography: font
styles, text justification, writing direction, word wrap, etc.

Think of it this way: why should a table have a font size? Only the
*text* inside the table can have a font size, the table is just a box
with layout that contains other *boxes*. Why don't we write
`table text { size: 16px; }` instead of `table { font-size: 16px; }`?
Text nodes exist today.

Well because that's how HTML's `<font>` tag worked. Instead of just
making a selector for text nodes, they gave all the other elements font
properties. They didn't *get rid* of font tags, they made them invisible
and put one inside each DOM node.

    <html><font>
      <body><font>
        <h1><font>Hello World</font></h1>
        <p><font>Welcome to the future.</font></p>
      </font></body>
    </font></html>

Unreasonable Behavior
---------------------

It was decided the world would be made of `block` and `inline`
elements—divs and spans—and they saw that it was good, until someone
came along and said, hey, so what about my table?

    <table>
      <tr>
        <td>Forever</td>
        <td>Alone</td>
      </tr>
    </table>

This `<table>` can't be replicated with CSS 1. Tables require a
particular arrangement of children and apply their own box model. It's a
directive posing amongst generic markup, just like Angular.

CSS has never been able to deliver on the promise of turning semantic
HTML into arbitrary layout. We've always been forced to add extra divs
or classes. These are really just attachment points for independent
behaviors.

Purists see these as a taint upon otherwise pristine HTML, even though
I've never seen someone close a website because the markup was messy.
Not all HTML should be semantic. Rather, HTML stripped of its
non-semantic parts should remain meaningful to *robots*.

CSS 2's solution was instead to make `<table>` invisible too, to go with
the invisible `<float>`, `<layer>`, `<clear>` and `<frame>` tags which
we pretended we didn't have. Watch:

> **17.2.1 Anonymous table objects**\
> \
>  […] Any table element will automatically generate necessary anonymous
> table objects around itself, consisting of at least three nested
> objects corresponding to a 'table'/'inline-table' element, a
> 'table-row' element, and a 'table-cell' element. Missing elements
> generate anonymous objects (e.g., anonymous boxes in visual table
> layout) according to the following rules […]

    .grid {
      display: table;
    }
    .grid > ul {
      display: table-row;
    }
    .grid > ul > li {
      display: table-cell;
    }

*This is called Not Using Tables.*

Without typographical styles, `block` elements start to look very
different. They're styled boxes with implied layout constraints. They
stack vertically, expand horizontally and shrink wrap vertically.
Floated blocks are boxes that stack horizontally, and shrink wrap both
ways. Tables are grids of boxes that are locked together.

Just think how much simpler CSS would be if boxes had box styles and
text had text styles, instead of all of them having both. Besides, block
margins and paddings don't even work the same on inline elements,
there's a whole new layout behavior there.

So we do have two kinds of objects, *text and boxes*, but several
different ways of combining them into layout: inline, stacked, nested,
absolute, relative, fixed, floated, flex or table. We have optional
behaviors like scrollable, draggable, clipped or overflowing.

They're spread across `display`, `position`, `float` and more, only
meaningful in some combinations. And presence is mixed in there too. As
a result, you can't unhide an element without knowing its display model.
This is a giant red flag.

Thinking with Portals
---------------------

It should further raise eyebrows that the binary world of `inline` and
`block` now also includes a hybrid called `inline-block`.

![Medium share thing](http://acko.net/files/shadowdom/medium.png)

You generally don't need to embed a contact form–or all of Gmail—in the
middle of mixed English/Hebrew poetry shaped like a bird. You just
don't. To attach something to flowing text, you should insert an anchor
point instead and add floating constraints. Links are called *anchor
tags* for a reason. Why did we forget this?

Don't shove your entire widget right between the words. You'd inherit
styles, match new selectors and bubble all your events up through the
text just for the sake of binding a pair of (x, y) coordinates.

Heck, pointer events, cursors, hover states... these are for interactive
elements only. Why isn't that optional, so mouse events wouldn't need to
bubble up through inert markup? This would completely avoid the
`mouseover` vs `mouseenter` problem. What is the point of putting a
resize cursor on something that is dead without JavaScript? Pointer
events shouldn't fire on inert children, and inert parents shouldn't
care about interactive children. It's about boundaries, not hierarchy.

Things like SVG are better used as image tags instead of embedded trees,
just slotting into place while ignoring their surroundings. They do need
their own tree structure, but there is little reason to graft it onto
HTML/CSS, inheriting original sin. The nodes have too little in common.
At most you can share the models, not the controllers.

We should be able to manipulate them from the outside, like a
`<canvas>`, but define and load them declaratively, like an image tag.

For that matter, MathML should really be a single inline text tag,
optimized for math, not a bunch of tags. Regular text spans are not just
"plain text". They are trimmed, joined, bidirectionalized, word wrapped
and ellipsified before display. It's a separate embedded layout model
that makes up the true, invisible `<p>` tag. A tag that HTML1 actually
sort of got right: as an *operator*.

We create JavaScript with code, not as *abstract syntax trees*. Why
should I build articles and embedded languages out of enormously nested
trees, instead of just typing them out and adding some *anchor* tags
around specific interesting parts? The DOM already inserts invisible
text nodes everywhere. We didn't need to wrap all our words in `<text>`
tags by hand just to embiggen one of them. The mutant tree on the right
could just look like this:

    <math>x = (-b &pm; &Sqrt;(b^2 - 4 a c)) / 2a</math>

    <math>x = (-b &pm; &Sqrt;(b^2 - 4 a c)) / 2a</math>

*Wasn't HTML5 supposed to match how people write it? LaTeX exists.*

And which is easier: defining a hairy new category of pseudo-elements
like `:first-letter` and `:first-line`… or just telling people to wrap
their first letter in a span if they really want to make it giant? It
was ridiculous to have this feature in a spec that didn't include
tables.

The `:first-line` problem should be solved differently: you define two
*separate* blocks inside a directive, to spread markup across two
children with a content binding. It's no different from flowing text
across lines and columns.

    <mrow>
      <mi>x</mi>
      <mo>=</mo>
      <mfrac>
        <mrow>
          <mrow>
            <mo>-</mo>
            <mi>b</mi>
          </mrow>
          <mo>&#xB1;<!--PLUS-MINUS SIGN--></mo>
          <msqrt>
            <mrow>
              <msup>
                <mi>b</mi>
                <mn>2</mn>
              </msup>
              <mo>-</mo>
              <mrow>
                <mn>4</mn>
                <mo>&#x2062;<!--INVISIBLE TIMES--></mo>
                <mi>a</mi>
                <mo>&#x2062;<!--INVISIBLE TIMES--></mo>
                <mi>c</mi>
              </mrow>
            </mrow>
          </msqrt>
        </mrow>
        <mrow>
          <mn>2</mn>
          <mo>&#x2062;<!--INVISIBLE TIMES--></mo>
          <mi>a</mi>
        </mrow>
      </mfrac>
    </mrow>

*This is the first example in the MathML spec. Really. "Invisible
times".*

    <join>
      <box class="first-line"></box>
      <box></box>
      <content>Hello New World</content>
    </join>

*Would this really be insane?*

The Boxed Model
---------------

CSS got it wrong and we're now suffering the consequences. The HTML
feature that was ignored in CSS 1 was the thing they should've focused
on: tables, which were directives that generated layout. It set us on a
path of trying to fake them by piggybacking on supposedly semantic
elements, like lipstick on a div. Really we were pigeonholing non-linear
layout as a nested styling problem.

Semantic content was a false spectre on the document level. Making our
menus out of `<ul>` and `<li>` tags did not help impaired users skip to
the main article. Adding roman numerals for lists did not help us number
our headers and chapters automatically.

View and render trees are supposed to be simple and transparent data
structures, the *model for* and *result of* layout. This is why absolute
positioning is a performance win for mobile: it avoids creating
invisible dynamic constraints between things that rarely change. Styles
are orthogonal to that, they merely define the shape, not where it goes.

Flash had its flaws, but it worked 15 years ago. Shoving raw SVG or
MathML into the DOM—or god forbid XML3D–is a terrible idea. It's like
there's an entire class of developers who've now forgotten how fast
computers actually are and how memory is supposed to work. A [stringly
typed](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?StringlyTyped) kitchen sink is not it.

So I frown when I see people excited about SVG in the browser in the
year 2014, making polygons out of CSS 3D or driving divs with React. Yes
I know, it's fun and it does work. And Angular shows the web component
approach has merit. But we need a way out.

CSS should be limited to style and typography. We can define a real
layout system next to it rather than on top of it. The two can combine
in something that still includes semantic HTML fragments, but wraps
layout as a first class citizen. We shouldn't be afraid to embrace a
modular web page made of isolated sections, connected by reference
instead of hierarchy.

Not my problem though, I can make better SVGs with WebGL in the
meantime. But one can dream.

March 24, 2014

[Angular](/tag/angular/) [CSS](/tag/css/) [DOM](/tag/dom/)
[JavaScript](/tag/javascript/) [Latest](/tag/latest/)
[React](/tag/react/) [SVG](/tag/svg/)

[](/)

Home

[](#)

[](http://feeds.feedburner.com/acko/GMkJ "Subscribe to the Atom feed")

© 2003–2014

[](https://plus.google.com/112457107445031703644?rel=author)

**This article contains graphics made with WebGL, which your browser
does not seem to support.**\
 Try [Google Chrome](http://chrome.google.com/) or [Mozilla
Firefox](http://getfirefox.com/). [×](#)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://acko.net/blog/shadow-dom/
