-   [Home](http://kukuruku.co)
-   [Sign in](#)
-   [Hubs](http://kukuruku.co/hubs/)
-   [Stream](http://kukuruku.co/stream/)

-   [**Twitter](https://twitter.com/kukurukuco)
-   [**Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/kukurukuco)

☰ [Sign in](http://kukuruku.co/login/)

Writing a File System in Linux Kernel
=====================================

By [kmu1990](http://habrahabr.ru/users/kmu1990/), [Original
Source](http://habrahabr.ru/company/spbau/blog/218833/)

###### Who This Article is for

\
 There are no complex or difficult concepts in this article, all
required is a basic knowledge of the command line, the C language,
Makefile and a general understanding about file systems.\
 \
 In this article I am going to describe the components necessary for
development inside the Linux kernel, then we’ll write the simplest
loadable kernel module and, finally, write a framework for the future
file system. It’s a module that will register quite a useful (for now)
file system in the kernel. The ones familiar with development inside
Linux kernel may not find anything interesting here. \
 \

#### Introduction

\
 A file system is one of the central OS subsystems. File systems
continue to develop as operating systems evolve. Currently we have an
entire heterogenetic zoo of file systems, from the old “classic”
[UFS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_File_System), to the new exotic
[NILFS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NILFS) (though this idea isn’t new
at all, look at
[LFS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Log-structured_File_System_(BSD)))
and [BTRFS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Btrfs). We aren’t going to try
to throw down monsters like ext3/4 and BTRFS. Our file system will be of
educational nature, and we will familiarize ourselves with the Linux
kernel using its help. \
 \

##### Environment Setup

\
 Before we get into the kernel, let’s prepare all the necessary steps
for building our OS module. I use Ubuntu, so I’m going to setup within
this environment. Fortunately, it’s not difficult at all. To begin with,
we’re going to need a compiler and building facilities:\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
sudo apt-get install gcc build-essential
~~~~

\
 Then we may need the kernel source code. We’ll go the easy route and
won’t bother rebuilding the kernel from the source. We’ll just determine
kernel headers; this should be enough to write a loadable module. The
headers can be determined the following way:\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
sudo apt-get install linux-headers-`uname -r`
~~~~

\
 And now I’m going to jump onto my soap box. Rummaging in the kernel on
a working machine isn’t the smartest idea, so I strongly recommend you
perform all these actions withiin a virtual machine. We won’t do
anything dangerous so the stored data is safe. But if anything goes
wrong, we’ll probably have to restart the system. Besides, it’s more
comfortable to debug the kernel modules in a virtual machine (such as
QEMU), though this question won’t be considered in the article. \
 \

##### Environment Check Up

\
 In order to check the environment we’ll write and start the kernel
module, which won’t do anything useful (Hello, World!). Let’s consider
the module code. I named it super.c (super is derived from superblock):\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
#include <linux/init.h>
  #include <linux/module.h>

  static int __init aufs_init(void)
  {
      pr_debug("aufs module loaded\n");
      return 0;
  }

  static void __exit aufs_fini(void)
  {
      pr_debug("aufs module unloaded\n");
  }

  module_init(aufs_init);
  module_exit(aufs_fini);

  MODULE_LICENSE("GPL");
  MODULE_AUTHOR("kmu");
~~~~

\
 \
 At the very beginning you can see two headers. They are an important
part of any loadable module. Then two functions: aufs\_init and
aufs\_fini follow. They will be called before and after the module
roll-out. \
 Some of you may be confused by \_\_init label. \_\_init is a hint to
the kernel that the function is used during module initialization only.
It means that after the module initialization it can be unloaded from
memory. There is an analogous marker for the data; the kernel can ignore
these hints. \
 The reference to \_\_init functions and data from the main module code
is a potential error.\
 That’s why during the module setup it should be checked that there are
no such references. If such message is found, the kernel setup system
will give out an alert. The similar check is carried out for \_\_exit
functions and data. If you want to know details about \_\_init and
\_\_exit, you can refer to the [source
code](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/init.h?v=3.14).\
 \
 Please note that aufs\_init returns int. Thus the kernel finds out that
during the module initialization something went wrong. If the module
hasn’t returned a zero value, it means that an error occurred during
initialization. \
 In order to find out which functions should be called at module loading
and unloading, two macros module\_init and module\_exit are used. In
order to learn details, refer to lxr, it’s really useful if you want to
study the kernel. \
 pr\_debug – is a function (it’s a macro actually, but it doesn’t matter
for now) of kernel output to the log, it’s very similar to the family of
printf functions with some extensions (for example, for IP and MAC
addresses printing. You will find a complete list of modifiers in the
documentation of the kernel. Together with pr\_debug, there is an entire
family of macros: pr\_info, pr\_warn, pr\_err and others. If you are
familiar with Linux module development you know about printk function.
pr\_\* open into printk calls, so you can use printk instead of them. \
 \
 Then there are macros with information about descendants – a license
and an author. There are also other macros that allow to store manifold
information about the module. For example MODULE\_VERSION, MODULE\_INFO,
MODULE\_SUPPORTED\_DEVICE and others. By the way, if you’re using
different form GPL license, you won’t be able to use some functions
available for GPL modules. \
 \
 Now let’s build and start our module. We’ll write Makefile for this. It
will build our module:\
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
obj-m := aufs.o
aufs-objs := super.o

CFLAGS_super.o := -DDEBUG

all:
    make -C /lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build M=$(PWD) modules

clean:
    make -C /lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build M=$(PWD) clean
~~~~

\
 Makefile calls Makefile for building, it should be located in
/lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build catalogue (uname –r is a command
that returns the version of the started kernel). If the headers (or
source codes) of the kernel are located in another catalogue, you should
fix it. \
 \
 obj-m allows to state the name of the future module. In our case it
will be named aufs.ko (ko exactly – from kernel object). \
 aufs-objs allows to indicate what source code aufs module should be
built from. In our case super.c file will be used. You can also indicate
different compiler flags, which will be used (in addition to those used
by Makefile kernel) for object files building. In our case I pass
–DDEBUG flag during super.c build. If we don’t pass the flag, we won’t
see pr\_debug output in the system log. \
 \
 In order to build the module make command should be executed. If
everything’s fine, aufs.ko file will appear in the catalogue. It’s quite
easy to load the module: \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
sudo insmod ./aufs.ko
~~~~

\
 In order to make sure that the module is loaded you can look at lsmod
command output. \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
lsmod | grep aufs
~~~~

\
 In order to see the system log, dmesg command should be called. We’ll
see messages from our module in it. It’s not difficult to unload the
module: \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
sudo rmmod aufs
~~~~

\

##### Returning to the File System

\
 Thus, the environment is adjusted and operates. We know how to build
the simplest module, load and unload it. Now we should consider the file
system. The file system design should begin “on paper”, from a thorough
consideration of the data structures being usedr. But we’ll follow a
simple path and defer the details of files and folders storage at the
disk for the next time. Now we’ll write a framework of our future file
system. \
 \
 The life of a file system begins with check-in. You can check-in the
file system by calling
[register\_filesystem](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/filesystems.c?v=3.14#L69).
We’ll register the file system in the function of module initialization.
There’s
[unregister\_filesystem](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/filesystems.c?v=3.14#L101)
for the file system unregistration and we’ll call it in aufs\_fini
function of our module. \
 \
 Both functions accept a pointer to file\_system\_type structure as a
parameter. It’ll “describe” the file system. Consider it as a class of
the file system. \
 There’re enough fields in the structure, but we’re interested in some
of them only: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static struct file_system_type aufs_type = {
      .owner = THIS_MODULE,
      .name = "aufs",
      .mount = aufs_mount,
      .kill_sb = kill_block_super,
      .fs_flags = FS_REQUIRES_DEV, 
  };
~~~~

\
 First of all, we are interested in **name** field. It stores the file
system name. This name will be used during the assembling. \
 \
 mount & kill\_sb — are two fields containing pointers to functions. The
first function will be called during the file system assembling, the
second one during disassembly. It’s enough to implement one of them, and
we’ll use kill\_block\_super instead of the second one, which is
provided by the kernel. \
 \
 fs\_flags — stores different flags. In our case it stores
FS\_REQUIRES\_DEV flag, which says that our file system needs a disk for
operation (though it’s not the case for the moment). You don’t have to
indicate this flag if you don’t want to, everything will operate without
it. \
 Finally, owner field is necessary in order to setup a counter of links
to the module. The link counter is necessary so that the module wouldn’t
be unloaded too soon. For example, if the file system has been
assembled, the module loading can lead to the crash. The link counter
won’t allow to unload the module till its being used, i.e. until we
disassembly the file system. \
 \
 Now let’s consider aufs\_mount function. It should assemble the device
and return the structure describing a root catalogue of the file system.
It sounds quite complicated, but, fortunately, the kernel will do it for
us as well: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static struct dentry *aufs_mount(struct file_system_type *type, int flags,
                                      char const *dev, void *data)
  {
      struct dentry *const entry = mount_bdev(type, flags, dev,
                                                  data, aufs_fill_sb);
      if (IS_ERR(entry))
          pr_err("aufs mounting failed\n");
      else
          pr_debug("aufs mounted\n");
      return entry;
  }
~~~~

\
 The biggest part of work happens inside moun\_bdev function. We are
interested in its aufs\_fill\_sb parameter. It’s a pointer to the
function (again), which will be called from mount\_bdev in order to
initialize the superblock. But before we move on to it, an important
file subsystem of the kernel — dentry structure – should be considered.
This structure represents a section of the path to the file name. For
example, if we refer to /usr/bin/vim file, we’ll have different
structure exemplars representing sections of / (root catalogue), bin/
and vim path. The kernel supports these structures cache. It allows to
quickly find inode (another center structure) by the file (path) name.
aufs\_mount function should return dentry, which represents the root
catalogue of our file system. aufs\_fill\_sb function will create it. \
 \
 Thus, for the moment aufs\_fill\_sb is the most important function in
our module and it looks like the following: \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static int aufs_fill_sb(struct super_block *sb, void *data, int silent)
  {
      struct inode *root = NULL;

      sb->s_magic = AUFS_MAGIC_NUMBER;
      sb->s_op = &aufs_super_ops;

      root = new_inode(sb);
      if (!root)
      {
           pr_err("inode allocation failed\n");
           return -ENOMEM;
      }

      root->i_ino = 0;
      root->i_sb = sb;
      root->i_atime = root->i_mtime = root->i_ctime = CURRENT_TIME;
      inode_init_owner(root, NULL, S_IFDIR);

      sb->s_root = d_make_root(root);
      if (!sb->s_root)
      {
          pr_err("root creation failed\n");
          return -ENOMEM;
      }

     return 0;
 }
~~~~

\
 First of all, we fill super\_block structure. What kind of structure is
it? Usually file systems store in a special place of a disk partition
(this place is chosen by file system) the set of file system parameters,
such as the block size, the number of occupied/free blocks, file system
version, “pointer” to the root catalogue, magic number, by which a
driver can check that the necessary file system is stored on the disk.
This structure is named superblock (look at the picture below).
super\_block structure in Linux kernel is mainly intended for similar
goals, we save a magic number in it and dentry for the root catalogue
(the one returned by mount\_bdev).\
 \
 Besides, in s\_op field of super\_block structure we store a pointer to
super\_operations structure — these are super\_block “class methods”,
it’s another structure storing a lot of pointers to the functions. \
 I’ll make another note here. Linux kernel is written on C, without
support of different OOP features from the language side. But we can
structure a program following OOP ideas without support from the
language. So the structures storing a lot of pointers to the functions
can be met quite often in the kernel. It’s a method of virtual functions
implementation by current facilities. \
 \
 Let’s get back to super\_block structure and its “methods”. We’re
interested in its put\_super field. We’ll save a “destructor” of our
superblock in it” \
 \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
static void aufs_put_super(struct super_block *sb)
  {
      pr_debug("aufs super block destroyed\n");
  }

  static struct super_operations const aufs_super_ops = {
      .put_super = aufs_put_super,
  };
~~~~

\
 While aufs\_put\_super function does nothing useful, we use it just in
order to type in the system log one more line. aufs\_put\_super function
will be called within kill\_block\_super (see above) before super\_block
structure deleting. i.e. when disassembling the file system. \
 \
 Now let’s return to the most important aufs\_fill\_sb function. Before
we create dentry for the root catalogue we should create an index node
(inode) of the root catalogue. Inode structure is probably the most
important one in the file system. Each file system object (a file, a
folder, a special file, a magazine, etc.) identifies with inode. As well
as super\_block, inode structure reflects the way file systems are
stored on a disk. Inode name comes from index node, meaning that it \
 Indexes files and folders on a disk. Usually inside inode on a disk a
directive to the place file data are stored on a disk (in which blocks
he file content is stored), different access flags (available for
read/write/execute), information about the file owner, time of
creation/modification/writing/execution and other similar things are
stored. \
 \
 We can’t read from the disk yet, so we’ll fill inode with fictive data.
As time of creation/modification/writing/execution we use the current
time and the kernel will assign the owner and access permissions (call
inode\_init\_owner function). Finally, create dentry bound with the root
inode. \
 \
 Skeleton Check Up\
 \
 The skeleton of our file system is ready. It’s time to check it.
Building and loading of the file system driver doesn’t differ from
building and loading of a general module. We’ll use loop device instead
of a real disk for experiments. It’s a “disk” driver, which writes data
not on the physical device, but to the file (disk image). Let’s create a
disk image. It doesn’t store any data yet, so it’s simple: \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
touch image
~~~~

\
 We should also create a catalogue, which will be an assembling point
(root) of our file system:\

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
mkdir dir
~~~~

\
 Now using this image we’ll assemble our file system: \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
sudo mount -o loop -t aufs ./image ./dir
~~~~

\
 If the operation ended successfully, we’ll see messages from our module
in the system log. In order to disassemble the file system we should: \

~~~~ {.prettyprint}
sudo umount ./dir
~~~~

\
 Check the system log again.\
 \

#### Summary

\
 We familiarized ourselves with creation of loadable kernel modules and
main structures of the file subsystem. We also wrote a real file system,
which can assemble and disassemble only (it’s quite silly for the time
being, but we’re going to fix it in future). \
 \
 Then we’re going to consider data reading from the disk. To begin with
we’ll define the way data will be stored on disks. We’ll also learn how
to read superblock and inodes from the disk. \
 \

#### Links

\

-   The code to the article is available at
    [github](https://github.com/krinkinmu/aufs_les1)
-   An Indian has quite recently written a simple file system, he has
    performed [a big job](https://github.com/psankar/simplefs)
-   I understand that it’s not very correct educationally to send the
    newcomers to the kernel source code (though it’s useful to read
    them); I still recommend all the interested ones to look at the
    source code of a very simple
    [ramfs](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/ramfs/) file system.
    Besides, unlike our file system, ramfs doesn’t use a disk. It stores
    everything in the memory.

-   [](#)
    1
-   [2](#)
-   15810
-   [**](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel)
-   [**](http://twitter.com/share?url=http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel&text=Writing%20a%20File%20System%20in%20Linux%20Kernel%20@KukurukuCo)
-   [**](http://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?s=100&p[url]=http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel)

###### Published by

[](http://kukuruku.co/profile/kukuruku/)

![Kukuruku Hub](/mod_pagespeed_static/1.JiBnMqyl6S.gif)

#### [Kukuruku Hub](http://kukuruku.co/profile/kukuruku/)

We work in the dark. We do what we can. We give what we have. Our doubt
is our passion, and our passion is our task. The rest is the madness of
art.

[Follow](#)

###### Published in

#### [\*nix](http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/ "*nix")

The \*nix world is all about Unix-like systems, e.g., Linux, BSD, etc

### 0 comments

Only registered users can comment.

-   [About](/page/about)
-   [Rules](/page/rules)
-   [Privacy Policy](/page/privacy)
-   [Contact
    us](http://www.cloudflare.com/email-protection#a4d7d1d4d4cbd6d0e4cfd1cfd1d6d1cfd18ac7cb)
-   ·
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/kukurukuco)
-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/kukurukuco)

[](# "Up")

×

#### Authorization

﻿

-   [**Sign in with
    Github](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/github/ "Sign in with Github")
-   [**Sign in with
    Twitter](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/twitter/?authorize=1 "Sign in with Twitter")
-   [**Sign in with Facebook](# "Sign in with Facebook")

﻿

-   [**Sign in with
    Github](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/github/ "Sign in with Github")
-   [**Sign in with
    Twitter](http://kukuruku.co/login/openid/twitter/?authorize=1 "Sign in with Twitter")
-   [**Sign in with Facebook](# "Sign in with Facebook")

login

e-mail

password

re-enter password

let's make sure you are not a robot

Sign up

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://kukuruku.co/hub/nix/writing-a-file-system-in-linux-kernel
