Dismiss

Caution iconAttention
=====================

The browser or device you are using is out of date. It has known
security flaws and a limited feature set. You will not see all the
features of some websites. Please update your browser. A list of the
most popular browsers can be found below.

-   [Mozilla Firefox](http://www.firefox.com/)
-   [Internet Explorer](http://windows.microsoft.com/ie)
-   [Google Chrome](http://www.google.com/chrome)
-   [Safari](http://www.apple.com/safari/)
-   [Opera](http://www.opera.com/)

[International Editions](#)

-   -   [Al Jazeera English](http://www.aljazeera.com)
-   -   [Al Jazeera Arabic](http://www.aljazeera.net/)
-   -   [Al Jazeera Balkans](http://balkans.aljazeera.com)
-   -   [Al Jazeera Mubasher](http://mubasher.aljazeera.net/)
-   -   [Al Jazeera Turk](http://aljazeera.com.tr)

Display mobile navigation Display mobile search bar

[![Al Jazeera America logo](/content/dam/ajam/logos/AJAM-logo-gold2.png)
![Al Jazeera America
logo](/content/dam/ajam/logos/logo-header-mobile-new.png)](/)

-   [News](/ "News")
-   [Opinion](/opinions.html "Opinion")
-   [Video](/watch.html "Video")
-   [Shows](/watch/shows.html "Shows")
-   [Schedule](/watch/schedule.html "Schedule")
-   [More](#)
    -   [Opinion](/opinions.html "Opinion")
    -   [Shows](/watch/shows.html "Shows")

[](http://www.facebook.com/aljazeeraamerica "Facebook")
[](http://www.twitter.com/ajam "Twitter")
[](https://plus.google.com/+aljazeeraamerica "Google+")
[](http://www.youtube.com/aljazeeraamerica "Youtube")

Sections

[U.S.](/topics/topic/categories/us.html "U.S.")
[International](/topics/topic/categories/international.html "International")
[Economy](/topics/topic/categories/economy.html "Economy")
[Technology](/topics/topic/categories/technology.html "Technology")
[Science](/topics/topic/categories/science.html "Science")
[Environment](/topics/topic/categories/environment.html "Environment")
[Health](/topics/topic/categories/health.html "Health")
[Education](/topics/topic/categories/education.html "Education")
[Culture](/topics/topic/categories/culture.html "Culture")
[Sports](/topics/topic/categories/sports.html "Sports")

Trending

[Ukraine
Crisis](/topics/topic/event/ukraine-uprising.html "Ukraine Crisis") [NSA
Leaks](/topics/topic/organization/nsa.html "NSA Leaks") [Women's
Rights](/topics/topic/issue/womens-rights.html "Women's Rights")
[Special Coverage](/topics.html "Special Coverage")

Search Form

[Comments](#comments-container)

[Technology](/topics/topic/categories/technology.html)

Code your own utopia: Meet Ethereum, bitcoin’€™s most ambitious successor
=========================================================================

The logo of the new platform, Ethereum, which combines a bitcoin-like
network with a universal programming language that allows users to
invent whatever tools they want.

Code your own utopia: Meet Ethereum, bitcoin’€™s most ambitious successor
=========================================================================

A new ‘Lego of cryptofinance’ enables users to design social contracts

April 7, 2014 5:00AM ET

by [Nathan
Schneider](/profiles/s/nathan-schneider.html "Nathan  Schneider")
[@nathanairplane](http://www.twitter.com/nathanairplane "@nathanairplane")

The IRS issued a telling statement of metaphysics in March. A few weeks
before tax day, it ruled that
[bitcoin](http://america.aljazeera.com/topics/topic/issue/virtual-currency.html),
the first and best-known Internet-based cryptocurrency, is not to be
considered a currency at all but an investment, subject to capital-gains
tax. While this is a rather clumsy adaptation of antiquated regulations
to a field they were never designed to encompass, there is also a basic
truth in it. The IRS decision hints at why cryptocurrencies are about to
get a whole lot more disruptive as well as a great deal harder to
ignore: They can be used for much more than just payments.

Bitcoin appeared in early 2009 as a new kind of money that, thanks to
sophisticated mathematics, guarantees the security of transactions
within a decentralized, peer-to-peer network. Just a few months into a
catastrophic financial crisis, the pseudonymous inventor, Satoshi
Nakamoto, presented bitcoin as an insurgency against the mismanaged big
banks and state monetary regimes. The prototype network would make
possible, for the first time, a trustworthy currency native to the
Internet — not dependent on any single authority or regulator but on a
symphony of the combined computing power of its users.

The code underlying bitcoin was open source, and soon a flurry of
cryptocurrencies derived from it came into being — one with a cartoon
dog as its mascot, one adopted as a official tender by the traditional
Lakota Nation and hundreds more. But people soon realized that the kind
of system underlying bitcoin could have other uses too. It could be the
basis of a new way of registering domain names on the Web or of a
replacement for conventional email. Prototypes started to show how the
building blocks of finance could be reinvented on decentralized networks
— escrow transactions, commodity exchanges, derivatives, smart contracts
that can enforce themselves without needing an offline legal system.
Venture capitalists rushed to fund these projects. The new wave even has
its own buzzword: cryptocurrency 2.0.

By age 19, a lanky, Russian-born Canadian named Vitalik Buterin was a
founding editor of Bitcoin magazine and had helped develop applications
and code libraries for the cryptocurrency community. The more he learned
about the 2.0 prototypes underway, though, the more they struck him as
wasteful. Each was being built in isolation from the others, with its
own platform and framework.

“The approach that people were taking was sort of like having a computer
with a separate hardware module for solitaire, a separate hardware
module for Internet Explorer, a separate hardware module for World of
Warcraft,” he says. “It’s obviously a very inefficient way to do
things.”

In November, Buterin started to circulate a [white
paper](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/%5BEnglish%5D-White-Paper)
describing a platform on which the whole breadth of new cryptocurrency
applications could be built. He called it Ethereum. Rather than being a
Swiss Army knife of separate tools, Ethereum would be simple: It would
combine a bitcoin-like network with a universal programming language
that would allow users to invent whatever tools they want. These tools
would be able to interact with one another and conduct transactions with
a common currency called ether. In the white paper, he described
Ethereum as a “Lego of cryptofinance.” With it, all the imagined
potential of bitcoin could be put to use in one place — plus a lot of
the not-yet-imagined potential too.

Buterin expected that he’d get some useful feedback on the proposal,
maybe spend a few weeks coding a prototype and then move on to something
else. But now, at 20, he is seeing his idea catch on among fellow
hackers around the world, and arrangements are being made to incorporate
a nonprofit for Ethereum in the legal free-for-all of Switzerland. The
project’s team, which is almost entirely male, includes experts in
finance, mathematics, software development and product design. Among
them are two former Goldman Sachs employees — which has been a matter of
some dismay in the heavily libertarian, anti-establishment
cryptocurrency community. But it’s also an indication of the level at
which Ethereum may soon be competing.

**The world’s next social contracts, the successors to the Declaration
of the Rights of Man and the U.S. Constitution, could be written in
Ethereum’s programming language.**

What bitcoin is for money, Ethereum is for contracts, and contracts are
part of what undergirds any relationship or organization or political
order. As enthusiasts attach their own ambitions to the Ethereum
concept, Buterin has found that his “Lego of cryptofinance” could have
an impact far beyond finance. “When other people came along and started
bringing their ideas in,” he says, “I realized having a more efficient
and powerful form of money is almost the least interesting part.” A
group called BitCongress, for instance, is already using Ethereum as the
basis for a cryptography-created legislation toolbox that would make
polls easy and verifiable without the need for a trusted authority to
count the votes.

With Ethereum, one could code a constitution for a nongeographic country
that people can choose to join, pay taxes to, receive benefits from and
cast votes in — and whose rules they would then have to obey. One could
design a transnational microlending program or a scheme for universal
basic income or a new kind of credit score. In one [online
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zRpziAtk61g) two Ethereum
pioneers demonstrate how to code a simple marriage contract. The world’s
next social contracts, the successors to the Declaration of the Rights
of Man and the U.S. Constitution, could be written in Ethereum’s
programming language.

What makes much of this possible is also perhaps the creepiest outgrowth
of cryptocurrency 2.0: distributed autonomous organizations, or DAOs.
Based on charters taking the form of code on a peer-to-peer network,
these are entities that could automate many of the tasks of a
conventional organization with varying levels of human input. For
instance, a DAO could act democratically, based on the votes of its
members, or it could conduct activities on the network without
consulting human users at all. In his
[talks](http://youtu.be/l9dpjN3Mwps?t=24m45s), Buterin sometimes makes a
passing reference to Skynet, the computer network in the “Terminator”
movies that mobilizes robots in a war of extermination against human
beings. “Nothing is stopping you with Ethereum at your fingertips,” he
claimed in the original white paper. He has felt the need to produce a
series of [posts](http://blog.ethereum.org/author/vbuterin) on the
Ethereum blog titled “DAOs are not scary,” which are only marginally
reassuring.

**Anything that is completely computer-operated is a potentially
oppressive system.**

Primavera De Filippi

Harvard’s Berkman Center for Internet and Society

Primavera De Filippi, a researcher at Harvard’s Berkman Center for
Internet and Society who studies the legal implications of decentralized
networks, takes such dystopic possibilities seriously. In Ethereum
“everything is dictated by the code,” she says. “Anything that is
completely computer-operated is a potentially oppressive system.”

Before the code takes charge, however, its inventors carry the
responsibility for making Ethereum useful, fair and secure. “Ultimately
it depends on Vitalik being a benevolent philosopher-king,” says Joel
Dietz, a cryptocurrency entrepreneur in Silicon Valley. But the Ethereum
community expresses little hesitation in vesting so much responsibility
in someone who was, until a few weeks ago, still a teenager, albeit a
supersmart one. Quite the opposite, in fact. Ethereum has released a
video, modeled on Apple’s famous “The Crazy Ones” commercial, that
places Buterin at the end of a sequence of computer innovators,
including Alan Turing and Steve Jobs.

Hype comes easily to those in the tech community, but De Filippi
believes Ethereum is poised to have real-world impact. “Bitcoin has
created precedents that have shown this is not so crazy,” she says of
the project’s transformative potential. De Filippi has made Ethereum a
major focus of her research, and she says that cryptocurrency investors
are starting to do the same. “They are really, really excited, and they
will invest a lot of money in Ethereum, which didn’t happen at the
beginning of bitcoin.” A presale of ether is slated to begin within a
few weeks, although the Ethereum network won’t be operational until
later this year at the earliest.

In the meantime, Ethereum’s developers say they are trying to keep the
platform as open and flexible as possible, rather than dictating what
may or may not be done with it. “The people behind this project want to
make it a very pure tool,” says Anthony D’Onofrio, a Bay Area Web
developer who is part of Ethereum’s creative team. But those taking part
have their own ideas about how they’d like to see it change the world.
“Put me in any environment and I’m going to be a revolutionary,” he
adds.

Even the most flexible platform comes with certain built-in tendencies.
Ethereum, for example, makes it easier to build organizations that are
less centralized and less dependent on geography than traditional ones
and certainly more automated. But it also creates a means for corporate
ownership and abuse to creep ever deeper into people’s lives through new
and more invasive kinds of contracts. To perceive the world through a
filter like Ethereum is to think of society as primarily contractual and
algorithmic, rather than ethical, ambiguous and made up of
flesh-and-blood human beings.

How this new ecosystem will take shape depends disproportionately on its
early adopters and on those with the savvy to write its code — who may
also make a lot of money from it. But tools like Ethereum are not just a
business opportunity. They’re a testing ground for whatever virtual
utopias people are able to translate into code, and the tests will have
nonvirtual effects. Idealists have as much to gain as entrepreneurs. As
for any utopia, though, the power struggles of the real world are sure
to find their way in as well.

Share This:

### Related News

Topics
  ~ [Finance](/topics/topic/issue/finance.html "Finance"),
    [Innovation](/topics/topic/issue/innovation.html "Innovation"),
    [Internet](/topics/topic/issue/internet.html "Internet"), [Virtual
    Currency](/topics/topic/issue/virtual-currency.html "Virtual Currency")

[](/articles/2014/4/7/renewable-energyinvestment.html "Study: Green energy drawing investment worldwide")

![Study: Green energy drawing investment
worldwide](/content/ajam/articles/2014/4/7/renewable-energyinvestment/_jcr_content/image.adapt.480.low.jpg)

Study: Green energy drawing investment worldwide

[](/articles/2014/4/4/mozilla-eich-okcupidgay.html "Mozilla chief steps down over 2008 donation against Calif. gay marriage")

![Mozilla chief steps down over 2008 donation against Calif. gay
marriage](/content/ajam/articles/2014/4/4/mozilla-eich-okcupidgay/_jcr_content/image.adapt.480.low.jpg)

Mozilla chief steps down over 2008 donation against Calif. gay marriage

[](/articles/2014/4/3/financial-regulatorlookingintocontroversialhighfrequencypractice.html "Government regulators probe high-frequency Wall Street trading")

![Government regulators probe high-frequency Wall Street
trading](/content/ajam/articles/2014/4/3/financial-regulatorlookingintocontroversialhighfrequencypractice/_jcr_content/image.adapt.480.low.jpg)

Government regulators probe high-frequency Wall Street trading

[](/articles/2014/4/1/dating-site-protestsnewmozillaceoindefenseofgaymarriage.html "Dating site targets CEO on gay marriage")

![Dating site targets CEO on gay
marriage](/content/ajam/articles/2014/4/1/dating-site-protestsnewmozillaceoindefenseofgaymarriage/_jcr_content/image.adapt.480.low.jpg)

Dating site targets CEO on gay marriage

#### Find Al Jazeera America on your TV

Go

#### Join the Al Jazeera America Mailing List

Get weekly news updates and the latest on what’s next for Al Jazeera
America

Submit

Please enter a valid email address!

[](/articles/2013/11/19/the-billion-dollarbitcoinrollercoaster.html)

![image](/content/ajam/articles/2013/11/19/the-billion-dollarbitcoinrollercoaster/_jcr_content/image.adapt.200.low.jpg)

#### The billion-dollar bitcoin roller coaster

The virtual currency is crashing into the mainstream, but are its users
ready?

[](/watch/shows/the-stream/the-stream-officialblog/2014/2/25/bitcoin-users-discusslessonsnextstepsafterexchangecollapses.html)

![image](/content/ajam/watch/shows/the-stream/the-stream-officialblog/2014/2/25/bitcoin-users-discusslessonsnextstepsafterexchangecollapses/_jcr_content/image.adapt.200.low.jpg)

#### Bitcoin users discuss lessons, next steps after exchange collapses

The implosion of one of the largest Bitcoin exchanges sparks an online
conversation about the future of the digital currency and the lessons
learned by its enthusiasts

[](/articles/2014/2/27/prosecutors-subpoenahighprofilebitcoinstartup.html)

![image](/content/ajam/articles/2014/2/27/prosecutors-subpoenahighprofilebitcoinstartup/_jcr_content/image.adapt.200.low.jpg)

#### Prosecutors subpoena high-profile bitcoin start-up

Feds to question Circle as investigation into the shuttering of popular
Mt. Gox exchange continues

### Editor's Picks

[](/articles/2014/4/8/nsa-after-snowden.html)

![NSA logs reveal flood of post-Snowden FOIA requests
](/content/ajam/articles/2014/4/8/nsa-after-snowden/_jcr_content/image.adapt.250.low.jpg)

NSA logs reveal flood of post-Snowden FOIA requests
[](/articles/2014/4/7/syria-homs-lugt.html)

![Ravaged by war, Syrians mourn the slain father of
Homs](/content/ajam/articles/2014/4/7/syria-homs-lugt/_jcr_content/image.adapt.250.low.jpg)

Ravaged by war, Syrians mourn the slain father of Homs
[](/articles/2014/4/7/genetic-effect-povertydisadvantagedchildren.html)

![Poverty ‘ages’ genes of young children, study
shows](/content/ajam/articles/2014/4/7/genetic-effect-povertydisadvantagedchildren/_jcr_content/image.adapt.250.low.jpg)

Poverty ‘ages’ genes of young children, study shows
[](/opinions/2014/4/mass-incarcerationprisonssolitaryconfinementmentalhealth.html)

![The collective crisis of solitary
confinement](/content/ajam/opinions/2014/4/mass-incarcerationprisonssolitaryconfinementmentalhealth/_jcr_content/image.adapt.250.low.jpg)

The collective crisis of solitary confinement
[](/opinions/2014/4/nicolas-maduro-onobamaandbushspoliciesinvenezuela.html)

![Obama continues Bush’s policies in
Venezuela](/content/ajam/opinions/2014/4/nicolas-maduro-onobamaandbushspoliciesinvenezuela/_jcr_content/image.adapt.250.low.jpg)

Obama continues Bush’s policies in Venezuela

#### Join the Al Jazeera America Mailing List

Get weekly news updates and the latest on what’s next for Al Jazeera
America

Submit

Please enter a valid email address!

### Join the Conversation

Ã—

### Error

Sorry, your comment was not saved due to a technical problem. Please try
again later or using a different browser.

Accept

[Watch more videos](/watch.html)

#### WATCH

[](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/afghanistan-votersdefytalibanwithlargeturnoutatthepolls.html "Afghan voters defy Taliban with large turnout at the polls")

![Afghan voters defy Taliban with large turnout at the
polls](/content/ajam/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/afghanistan-votersdefytalibanwithlargeturnoutatthepolls/_jcr_content/image.adapt.full.low.jpg)

##### [Al Jazeera America News](/watch/shows/live-news.html "Al Jazeera America News")

[The Week Ahead: Officials say 60 percent of eligible voters casted
their ballots in the presidential
elections](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/afghanistan-votersdefytalibanwithlargeturnoutatthepolls.html "Afghan voters defy Taliban with large turnout at the polls")

[](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/genetically-modifiedeggplantcausescontroversyinbangladesh.html "Genetically modified eggplant causes controversy in Bangladesh")

![Genetically modified eggplant causes controversy in
Bangladesh](/content/ajam/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/genetically-modifiedeggplantcausescontroversyinbangladesh/_jcr_content/image.adapt.full.low.jpg)

##### [Al Jazeera America News](/watch/shows/live-news.html "Al Jazeera America News")

[Environmental activists are worried about the harm modified crops will
do to the country's
ecosystem](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/genetically-modifiedeggplantcausescontroversyinbangladesh.html "Genetically modified eggplant causes controversy in Bangladesh")

[](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/rwanda-genocide-survivorsharesstoryofbeinghunted.html "Rwanda genocide survivor shares story of being hunted")

![Rwanda genocide survivor shares story of being
hunted](/content/ajam/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/rwanda-genocide-survivorsharesstoryofbeinghunted/_jcr_content/image.adapt.full.low.jpg)

##### [Al Jazeera America News](/watch/shows/live-news.html "Al Jazeera America News")

[Consolee Nishimwe recounts the horror of being on the run 20 years
ago](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/rwanda-genocide-survivorsharesstoryofbeinghunted.html "Rwanda genocide survivor shares story of being hunted")

[](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/more-measles-outbreaksincalifasdebatecontinuesovervaccines.html "More measles outbreaks in Calif. as debate continues over vaccines")

![More measles outbreaks in Calif. as debate continues over
vaccines](/content/ajam/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/more-measles-outbreaksincalifasdebatecontinuesovervaccines/_jcr_content/image.adapt.full.low.jpg)

##### [Al Jazeera America News](/watch/shows/live-news.html "Al Jazeera America News")

[With only four cases of the disease reported at this time last year,
parents fearful as the outbreak continues to
spread](/watch/shows/live-news/2014/4/more-measles-outbreaksincalifasdebatecontinuesovervaccines.html "More measles outbreaks in Calif. as debate continues over vaccines")

[](/watch/shows/consider-this/2014/4/mets-daniel-murphycriticizedfortakingpaternityleave.html "Mets' Daniel Murphy criticized for taking paternity leave")

![Mets' Daniel Murphy criticized for taking paternity
leave](/content/ajam/watch/shows/consider-this/2014/4/mets-daniel-murphycriticizedfortakingpaternityleave/_jcr_content/image.adapt.full.low.jpg)

##### [Consider This](/watch/shows/consider-this.html "Consider This")

[New York Mets' Daniel Murphy gets flak from sports talk-radio hosts for
missing games for the birth of his first
child](/watch/shows/consider-this/2014/4/mets-daniel-murphycriticizedfortakingpaternityleave.html "Mets' Daniel Murphy criticized for taking paternity leave")

[![Al Jazeera America
logo](/content/ajam/_jcr_content/footer.img.logoImage.png)](# "Al Jazeera America - home")

-   [NEWS](/ "NEWS")
-   [OPINION](/opinions.html "OPINION")
-   [VIDEO](/watch.html "VIDEO")
-   [SHOWS](/watch/shows.html "SHOWS")
-   [SCHEDULE](/watch/schedule.html "SCHEDULE")

-   [![FACEBOOK](/content/dam/ajam/logos/footer-icon-facebook.png)](http://www.facebook.com/aljazeeraamerica "FACEBOOK")
-   [![TWITTER](/content/dam/ajam/logos/footer-icon-twitter.png)](http://www.twitter.com/ajam "TWITTER")
-   [![GOOGLE
    +](/content/dam/ajam/logos/footer-icon-googleplus.png)](https://plus.google.com/+aljazeeraamerica/posts "GOOGLE +")
-   [![YOUTUBE](/content/dam/ajam/logos/footer-icon-youtube.png)](http://www.youtube.com/aljazeeraamerica "YOUTUBE")

-   -   [About](/tools/about.html "About ")
    -   [Our Mission, Vision and
        Values](/tools/vision-mission-values.html "Our Mission, Vision and Values")
    -   [Leadership](/tools/Leadership.html "Leadership")
    -   [Code of Ethics](/tools/code-of-ethics.html "Code of Ethics")
    -   [Careers](/tools/careers.html "Careers")

-   -   [Contact Us](/tools/contact.html "Contact Us")
    -   [Press Releases](/tools/pressreleases.html "Press Releases")
    -   [Advertise With Us](/tools/advertise.html "Advertise With Us")

-   -   [Visit Al Jazeera
        English](http://www.aljazeera.com "Visit Al Jazeera English")
    -   [Mobile](/tools/mobile.html "Mobile")
    -   [Newsletter](/tools/newsletter.html "Newsletter")
    -   [RSS](http://america.aljazeera.com/content/ajam/articles.rss "RSS")
    -   [Subscribe to YouTube
        Channel](http://www.youtube.com/aljazeeraamerica "Subscribe to YouTube Channel")

-   -   [Privacy Policy](/tools/privacy.html "Privacy Policy")
    -   [Terms of Use](/tools/terms.html "Terms of Use")

-   -   [Request Al Jazeera
        America](/tools/getajam.html "Request Al Jazeera America")
    -   [FAQ](/tools/faq.html "FAQ")
    -   [Community
        Guidelines](/tools/community-guidelines.html "Community Guidelines")
    -   [Sitemap](/tools/sitemap.html "Sitemap")

© 2014 Al Jazeera America, LLC. All rights reserved. \
 CHANGE THE WAY YOU LOOK AT NEWS and THERE'S MORE TO IT are Trademarks
of Al Jazeera America, LLC.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/4/7/code-your-own-utopiameetethereumbitcoinasmostambitioussuccessor.html
