[**ethereum blog](https://blog.ethereum.org/)

-   [www](https://www.ethereum.org)
-   [forums](http://forum.ethereum.org/)
-   [wiki](http://wiki.ethereum.org)
-   [reddit](http://reddit.com/r/ethereum)
-   [twitter](https://twitter.com/ethereumproject)
-   [facebook](https://www.facebook.com/ethereumproject)
-   [google+](https://plus.google.com/+EthereumOrgOfficial/posts)
-   [youtube](https://www.youtube.com/user/ethereumproject)

[**](javascript:;)

An Introduction to Futarchy
===========================

Introduction
------------

![user](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0c2adc17a0896fef419d5a4a7cb15b7c?s=96)

#### Vitalik Buterin

-   [**](http://github.com/vbuterin)
-   [**](https://blog.ethereum.org/feed/)

* * * * *

**LATEST POSTS**

[Secret Sharing and Erasure Coding: A Guide for the Aspiring Dropbox
Decentralizer](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/16/secret-sharing-erasure-coding-guide-aspiring-dropbox-decentralizer/)
16th August, 2014

[Announcement on planned withdrawal from
exodus](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/08/announcement-on-planned-exodus-withdrawal/)
08th August, 2014

[technical](https://blog.ethereum.org/category/technical/ "View all posts in technical")
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[An Introduction to Futarchy](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/21/introduction-futarchy/)
==========================================================================================

Posted by [Vitalik
Buterin](https://blog.ethereum.org/author/vitalik-buterin/) on **August
21st, 2014.

One of the more interesting long-term practical benefits of the
technology and concept behind [decentralized autonomous
organizations](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide/)
is that DAOs allow us to very quickly prototype and experiment with an
aspect of our social interactions that is so far arguably falling behind
our rapid advancements in information and social technology elsewhere:
organizational governance. Although our modern communications technology
is drastically augmenting individuals’ naturally limited ability to both
interact and
[gather](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperfect_information) and
[process](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounded_rationality)
information, the governance processes we have today are still dependent
on what may now be seen as centralized crutches and arbitrary
distinctions such as “member”, “employee”, “customer” and “investor” –
features that were arguably originally necessary because of the
[inherent difficulties](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar's_number)
of managing large numbers of people up to this point, but perhaps no
longer. Now, it may be possible to create systems that are more fluid
and generalized that take advantage of the full power law curve of
people’s ability and desire to contribute. There are a number of new
governance models that try to take advantage of our new tools to improve
transparency and efficiency, including [liquid
democracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_democracy) and
[holacracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holacracy); the one that I
will discuss and dissect today is
[futarchy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futarchy).

The idea behind futarchy was [originally
proposed](http://hanson.gmu.edu/futarchy.html) by economist Robin Hanson
as a futuristic form of government, following the slogan: vote values,
but bet beliefs. Under this system, individuals would vote not on
whether or not to implement particular policies, but rather on a metric
to determine how well their country (or charity or company) is doing,
and then [prediction
markets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prediction_market) would be used
to pick the policies that best optimize the metric. Given a proposal to
approve or reject, two prediction markets would be created each
containing one asset, one market corresponding to acceptance of the
measure and one to rejection. If the proposal is accepted, then all
trades on the rejection market would be reverted, but on the acceptance
market after some time everyone would be paid some amount per token
based on the futarchy’s chosen success metric, and vice versa if the
proposal is rejected. The market is allowed to run for some time, and
then at the end the policy with the higher average token price is
chosen.

Our interest in futarchy, as explained above, is in a slightly different
form and use case of futarchy, governing decentralized autonomous
organizations and cryptographic protocols; however, I am presenting the
use of futarchy in a national government first because it is a more
familiar context. So to see how futarchy works, let’s go through an
example.

Suppose that the success metric chosen is GDP in trillions of dollars,
with a time delay of ten years, and there exists a proposed policy:
“bail out the banks”. Two assets are released, each of which promises to
pay $1 per token per trillion dollars of GDP after ten years. The
markets might be allowed to run for two weeks, during which the “yes”
token fetches an average price of $24.94 (meaning that the market thinks
that the GDP after ten years will be $24.94 trillion) and the “no” token
fetches an average price of $26.20. The banks are not bailed out. All
trades on the “yes” market are reverted, and after ten years everyone
holding the asset on the “no” market gets $26.20 apiece.

\

![image](https://blog.ethereum.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/futarchy_top1.png)\

![image](https://blog.ethereum.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/futarchy_bottom1.png)\

Typically, the assets in a futarchy are zero-supply assets, similar to
Ripple IOUs or
[BitAssets](http://wiki.bitshares.org/index.php/Market_Peg). This means
that the only way the tokens can be created is through a derivatives
market; individuals can place orders to buy or sell tokens, and if two
orders match the tokens are transferred from the buyer to the seller in
exchange for USD. It’s possible to sell tokens even if you do not have
them; the only requirement in that case is that the seller must put down
some amount of collateral to cover the eventual negative reward. An
important consequence of the zero-supply property is that because the
positive and negative quantities, and therefore rewards cancel each
other out, barring communication and consensus costs the market is
actually free to operate.

### The Argument For

Futarchy has become a controversial subject since the idea was
originally proposed. The theoretical benefits are numerous. First of
all, futarchy fixes the “voter apathy” and “rational irrationality”
problem in democracy, where individuals do not have enough incentive to
even learn about potentially harmful policies because the probability
that their vote will have an effect is insignificant (estimated at [1 in
10
million](http://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gelman/research/published/probdecisive2.pdf)
for a US government national election); in futarchy, if you have or
obtain information that others do not have, you can personally
substantially profit from it, and if you are wrong you lose money.
Essentially, you are literally putting your money where your mouth is.

Second, over time the market has an evolutionary pressure to get better;
the individuals who are bad at predicting the outcome of policies will
lose money, and so their influence on the market will decrease, whereas
the individuals who are good at predicting the outcome of policies will
see their money and influence on the market increase. Note that this is
essentially the exact same mechanic through which economists argue that
traditional capitalism works at optimizing the production of [private
goods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Private_good), except in this case
it also applies to
[common](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_good_(economics)) and
[public goods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_good).

Third, one could argue that futarchy reduces potentially irrational
social influences to the governance process. It is a well-known fact
that, at least in the 20th century, the taller presidential candidate
has been [much more likely to
win](http://www.straightdope.com/columns/read/787/does-the-taller-candidate-always-win-the-election)
the election (interestingly, the [opposite
bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heights_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States_and_presidential_candidates#Comparative_table_of_heights_of_United_States_presidential_candidates)
existed pre-1920; a possible hypothesis is that the switchover was
caused by the [contemporaneous rise of
television](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Television)), and there is the
well-known story about voters picking George Bush because he was the
president “[they would rather have a beer
with](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/kurt-a-gardinier/the-beer-president_b_2043196.html)“.
In futarchy, the participatory governance process will perhaps encourage
focusing more purely on proposals rather than personalities, and the
primary activity is the most introverted and unsocial affair imaginable:
poring over models, statistical analyses and trading charts.

\

![image](http://bitcoincharts.com/charts/chart.png?width=940&m=mtgoxUSD&SubmitButton=Draw&r=360&i=&c=1&s=2013-11-30&e=2014-02-28&Prev=&Next=&t=S&b=&a1=&m1=10&a2=&m2=25&x=0&i1=&i2=&i3=&i4=&v=1&cv=0&ps=0&l=0&p=0&)\
 \
 *A market you would rather have a beer with*\
 \

The system also elegantly combines public participation and professional
analysis. Many people decry democracy as a descent to mediocrity and
demagoguery, and prefer decisions to be made by skilled technocratic
experts. Futarchy, if it works, allows individual experts and even
entire analysis firms to make individual investigations and analyses,
incorporate their findings into the decision by buying and selling on
the market, and make a profit from the differential in information
between themselves and the public – sort of like an
information-theoretic hydroelectric dam or [osmosis-based power
plant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Osmotic_power). But unlike more
rigidly organized and bureaucratic technocracies with a sharp
distinction between member and non-member, futarchies allow anyone to
participate, set up their own analysis firm, and if their analyses are
successful eventually rise to the top – exactly the kind of
[generalization](http://vitalik.ca/files/Chicago.pdf) and fluidity we
are looking for.

### The Argument Against

The opposition to futarchy is most well-summarized in two posts, [one by
Mencius
Moldbug](http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2009/05/futarchy-considered-retarded.html)
and the [other by Paul
Hewitt](http://torontopm.wordpress.com/2010/01/04/the-future-of-futarchy/).
Both posts are long, taking up thousands of words, but the general
categories of opposition can be summarized as follows:

1.  A single powerful entity or coalition wishing to see a particular
    result can continue buying “yes” tokens on the market and
    short-selling “no” tokens in order to push the token prices in its
    favor.
2.  Markets in general are known to be volatile, and this happens to a
    large extent because markets are “self-referential” – ie. they
    consist largely of people buying because they see others buying, and
    so they are not good aggregators of actual information. This effect
    is particularly dangerous because it can be exploited by market
    manipulation.
3.  The estimated effect of a single policy on a global metric is much
    smaller than the “noise” of uncertainty in what the value of the
    metric is going to be regardless of the policy being implemented,
    especially in the long term. This means that the prediction market’s
    results may prove to be wildly uncorrellated to the actual delta
    that the individual policies will end up having.
4.  Human values [are
    complex](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Complexity_of_value), and it
    is hard to compress them into one numerical metric; in fact, there
    may be just as many disagreements about what the metric should be as
    there are disagreements about policy now. Additionally, a malicious
    entity that in current democracy would try to lobby through a
    harmful policy might instead be able to cheat the futarchy by
    lobbying in an addition to the metric that is known to very highly
    correllate with the policy.
5.  A prediction market is zero-sum; hence, because participation has
    guaranteed nonzero communication costs, it is irrational to
    participate. Thus, participation will end up quite low, so there
    will not be enough market depth to allow experts and analysis firms
    to sufficiently profit from the process of gathering information.

On the first argument, [this video debate](http://vimeo.com/9262193)
between Robin Hanson and Mencius Moldbug, with David Friedman (Milton’s
son) later chiming in, is perhaps the best resource. The argument made
by Hanson and Friedman is that the presence of an organization doing
such a thing successfully would lead to a market where the prices for
the “yes” and “no” tokens do not actually reflect the market’s best
knowledge, presenting a massive profit-earning opportunity for people to
put themselves on the opposite side of the attempted manipulation and
thereby move the price back closer to the correct equilibrium. In order
to give time for this to happen, the price used in determining which
policy to take is taken as an average over some period of time, not at
one instant. As long as the market power of people willing to earn a
profit by counteracting manipulation exceeds the market power of the
manipulator, the honest participants will win and extract a large
quantity of funds from the manipulator in the process. Essentially, for
Hanson and Friedman, sabotaging a futarchy requires a 51% attack.

The most common rebuttal to this argument, made more eloquently by
Hewitt, is the “self-referential” property of markets mentioned above.
If the price for “trillions of US GDP in ten years if we bail out the
banks” starts off $24.94, and the price for “trillions of US GDP in ten
years if we don’t bail out the banks” starts off $26.20, but then one
day the two cross over to $27.3 for yes and $25.1 for no, would people
actually know that the values are off and start making trades to
compensate, or would they simply take the new prices as an indicator of
what the market thinks and accept or even reinforce them, as is often
theorized to happen in speculative bubbles?

### Self-reference

There is actually one reason to be optimistic here. Traditional markets
may perhaps be often self-referential, and cryptocurrency markets
especially so because they have no intrinsic value (ie. the only source
of their value *is* their value), but the self-reference happens in part
for a different reason than simply investors following each other like
lemmings. The mechanism is as follows. Suppose that a company is
interested in raising funds through share issuance, and currently has a
million shares valued at $400, so a market cap of $400 million; it is
willing to dilute its holders with a 10% expansion. Thus, it can raise
$40 million. The market cap of the company is supposed to target the
total amount of dividends that the company will ever pay out, with
future dividends [appropriately
discounted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discounted_cash_flow) by some
interest rate; hence, if the price is stable, it means that the market
expects the company to eventually release the equivalent of $400 million
in total dividends in [present
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value).

Now, suppose the company’s share price doubles for some reason. The
company can now raise $80 million, allowing it to do twice as much.
Usually, capital expenditure has diminishing returns, but not always; it
may happen that with the extra $40 million capital the company will be
able to earn twice as much profit, so the new share price will be
perfectly justified – even though the cause of the jump from $400 to
$800 may have been manipulation or random noise. Bitcoin has this effect
in an especially pronounced way; when the price goes up, all Bitcoin
users get richer, allowing them to build more businesses, justifying the
higher price level. The lack of intrinsic value for Bitcoin means that
*the self-referential effect is the only effect* having influence on the
price.

Prediction markets do not have this property at all. Aside from the
prediction market itself, there is no plausible mechanism by which the
price of the “yes” token on a prediction market will have any impact on
the GDP of the US in ten years. Hence, the only effect by which
self-reference can happen is the “everyone follows everyone else’s
judgement” effect. However, the extent of this effect is debatable;
perhaps because of the very recognition that the effect exists, there is
now an established culture of smart contrarianism in investment, and
politics is certainly an area where people are willing to keep to
unorthodox views. Additionally, in a futarchy, the relevant thing is not
how high individual prices are, but which one of the two is *higher*; if
you are certain that bailouts are bad, but you see the yes-bailout price
is now $2.2 higher for some reason, you know that something is wrong so,
in theory, you might be able to pretty reliably profit from that.

### Absolutes and differentials

This is where we get to the crux of the real problem: it’s not clear how
you can. Consider a more extreme case than the yes/no bailouts decision:
a company using a futarchy to determine how much to pay their CEO. There
[have been
studies](http://www.forbes.com/sites/susanadams/2014/06/16/the-highest-paid-ceos-are-the-worst-performers-new-study-says/)
suggesting that ultra-high-salary CEOs actually do not improve company
performance – in fact, much the opposite. In order to fix this problem,
why not use the power of futarchy and the market decide how much value
the CEO really provides? Have a prediction market for the company’s
performance if the CEO stays on, and if the CEO jumps off, and take the
CEO’s salary as a standard percentage of the difference. We can do the
same even for lower-ranking executives and if futarchy ends up being
magically perfect even the lowliest employee.

Now, suppose that you, as an analyst, predict that a company using such
a scheme will have a share price of $7.20 in twelve months if the CEO
stays on, with a 95% confidence interval of $2.50 (ie. you’re 95% sure
the price will be between $4.70 and $9.70). You also predict that the
CEO’s benefit to the share price is $0.08; the 95% confidence interval
that you have here is from $0.03 to $0.13. This is pretty realistic;
generally errors in measuring a variable are proportional to the value
of that variable, so the range on the CEO will be much lower. Now
suppose that the prediction market has the token price of $7.70 if the
CEO stays on and $7.40 if they leave; in short, the market thinks the
CEO is a rockstar, but you disagree. But how do you benefit from this?

The initial instinct is to buy “no” shares and short-sell “yes” shares.
But how many of each? You might think “the same number of each, to
balance things out”, but the problem is that the chance the CEO will
remain on the job is much higher than 50%. Hence, the “no” trades will
probably all be reverted and the “yes” trades will not, so alongside
shorting the CEO what you are also doing is taking a much larger risk
shorting the company. If you knew the percentage change, then you could
balance out the short and long purchases such that on net your exposure
to unrelated volatility is zero; however, because you don’t, the
risk-to-reward ratio is very high (and even if you did, you would still
be exposed to the variance of the company’s global volatility; you just
would not be biased in any particular direction).

From this, what we can surmise is that futarchy is likely to work well
for large-scale decisions, but much less well for finer-grained tasks.
Hence, a hybrid system may work better, where a futarchy decides on a
political party every few months and that political party makes
decisions. This sounds like giving total control to one party, but it’s
not; note that if the market is afraid of one-party control then parties
could voluntarily structure themselves to be composed of multiple groups
with competing ideologies and the market would prefer such combinations;
in fact, we could have a system where politicians sign up as individuals
and anyone from the public can submit a combination of politicians to
elect into parliament and the market would make a decision over all
combinations (although this would have the weakness that it is once
again more personality-driven).

### Futarchy and Protocols and DAOs

All of the above was discussing futarchy primarily as a political system
for managing government, and to a lesser extent corporations and
nonprofits. In government, if we apply futarchy to individual laws,
especially ones with relatively small effect like “reduce the duration
of patents from 20 years to 18 years”, we run into many of the issues
that we described above. Additionally, the fourth argument against
futarchy mentioned above, the complexity of values, is a particular sore
point, since as described above a substantial portion of political
disagreement is precisely in terms of the question of what the correct
values are. Between these concerns, and political slowness in general,
it seems unlikely that futarchy will be implemented on a national scale
any time soon. Indeed, it has not even really been tried for
corporations. Now, however, there is an entirely new class of entities
for which futarchy might be much better suited, and where it may finally
shine: DAOs.

To see how futarchy for DAOs might work, let us simply describe how a
possible protocol would run on top of Ethereum:

\

![image](https://blog.ethereum.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/futarchy.png)\

1.  Every round, `T` new DAO-tokens are issued. At the start of a round,
    anyone has the ability to make a proposal for how those coins should
    be distributed. We can simplify and say that a “proposal” simply
    consists of “send money to this address”; the actual plan for how
    that money would be spent would be communicated on some higher-level
    channel like a forum, and trust-free proposals could be made by
    sending to a contract. Suppose that `n` such proposals, `P[1]` …
    `P[n]`, are made.
2.  The DAO generates `n` pairs of assets, `R[i]` and `S[i]`, and
    randomly distributes the `T` units of each type of token in some
    fashion (eg. to miners, to DAO token holders, according to a formula
    itself determined through prior futarchy, etc). The DAO also
    provides `n` markets, where market `M[i]` allows trade between
    `R[i]` and `S[i]`.
3.  The DAO watches the average price of `S[i]` denominated in `R[i]`
    for all markets, and lets the markets run for `b` blocks (eg. 2
    weeks). At the end of the period, if market `M[k]` has the highest
    average price, then policy `P[k]` is chosen, and the next period
    begins.
4.  At that point, tokens `R[j]` and `S[j]` for `j != k` become
    worthless. Token `R[k]` is worth `m` units of some external
    reference asset (eg. ETH for a futarchy on top of Ethereum), and
    token `S[k]` is worth `z` DAO tokens, where a good value for `z`
    might be 0.1 and `m` self-adjusts to keep expenditures reasonable.
    Note that for this to work the DAO would need to also sell its own
    tokens for the external reference asset, requiring another
    allocation; perhaps `m` should be targeted so the token expenditure
    to purchase the required ether is `zT`.

Essentially, what this protocol is doing is implementing a futarchy
which is trying to optimize for the token’s price. Now, let’s look at
some of the differences between this kind of futarchy and
futarchy-for-government.

First, the futarchy here is making only a very limited kind of decision:
to whom to assign the `T` tokens that are generated in each round. This
alone makes the futarchy here much “safer”. A futarchy-as-government,
especially if unrestrained, has the potential to run into serious
unexpected issues when combined with the
[fragility-of-value](http://lesswrong.com/lw/y3/value_is_fragile/)
problem: suppose that we agree that GDP per capita, perhaps even with
some offsets for health and environment, is the best value function to
have. In that case, a policy that kills off the 99.9% of the population
that are not super-rich would win. If we pick plain GDP, then a policy
might win that extremely heavily subsidizes individuals and businesses
from outside relocating themselves to be inside the country, perhaps
using a 99% one-time capital tax to pay for a subsidy. Of course, in
reality, futarchies would patch the value function and make a new bill
to reverse the original bill before implementing any such obvious
egregious cases, but if such reversions become too commonplace then the
futarchy essentially degrades into being a traditional democracy. Here,
the worst that could happen is for all the N tokens in a particular
round to go to someone who will squander them.

Second, note the different mechanism for how the markets work. In
traditional futarchy, we have a zero-total-supply asset that is traded
into existence on a derivatives market, and trades on the losing market
are reverted. Here, we issue positive-supply assets, and the way that
trades are reverted is that the entire issuance process is essentially
reverted; both assets on all losing markets become worth zero.

The biggest difference here is the question of whether or not people
will participate. Let us go back to the earlier criticism of futarchy,
that it is irrational to participate because it is a zero-sum game. This
is somewhat of a paradox. If you have some inside information, then you
might think that it is rational to participate, because you know
something that other people don’t and thus your expectation of the
eventual settlement price of the assets is different from the market’s;
hence, you should be able to profit from the difference. On the other
hand, if everyone thinks this way, then even some people with inside
information will lose out; hence, the correct criterion for
participating is something like “you should participate if you think you
have better inside information than everyone else participating”. But if
everyone thinks this way then the equilibrium will be that no one
participates.

Here, things work differently. People participate by default, and it’s
harder to say what not participating is. You could cash out your `R[i]`
and `S[i]` coins in exchange for DAO tokens, but then if there’s a
desire to do that then `R[i]` and `S[i]` would be undervalued and there
would be an incentive to buy both of them. Holding only `R[i]` is also
not non-participating; it’s actually an expression of being bearish on
the merits of policy `P[i]`; same with holding only `S[i]`. In fact, the
closest thing to a “default” strategy is holding whatever `R[i]` and
`S[i]` you get; we can model this prediction market as a zero-supply
market plus this extra initial allocation, so in that sense the “just
hold” approach *is* a default. However, we can argue that the barrier to
participation is much lower, so participation will increase.

Also note that the optimization objective is simpler; the futarchy is
not trying to mediate the rules of an entire government, it is simply
trying to maximize the value of its own token by allocating a spending
budget. Figuring out more interesting optimization objectives, perhaps
ones that penalize common harmful acts done by existing corporate
entities, is an unsolved challenge but a very important one; at that
point, the measurement and metric manipulation issues might once again
become more important. Finally, the actual day-to-day governance of the
futarchy actually does follow a hybrid model; the disbursements are made
once per epoch, but the management of the funds within that time can be
left to individuals, centralized organizations, blockchain-based
organizations or potentially other DAOs. Thus, we can expect the
differences in expected token value between the proposals to be large,
so the futarchy actually will be fairly effective – or at least more
effective than the current preferred approach of “five developers
decide”.

### Why?

So what are the practical benefits of adopting such a scheme? What is
wrong with simply having blockchain-based organizations that follow more
traditional models of governance, or even more democratic ones? Since
most readers of this blog are already cryptocurrency advocates, we can
simply say that the reason why this is the case is the same reason why
we are interested in using cryptographic protocols instead of centrally
managed systems – cryptographic protocols have a much lower need for
trusting central authorities (if you are not inclined to distrust
central authorities, the argument can be more accurately rephrased as
“cryptographic protocols can more easily generalize to gain the
efficiency, equity and informational benefits of being more
participatory and inclusive without leading to the consequence that you
end up trusting unknown individuals”). As far as social consequences go,
this simple version of futarchy is far from utopia, as it is still
fairly similar to a profit-maximizing corporation; however, the two
important improvements that it does make are (1) making it harder for
*executives* managing the funds to cheat both the organization and
society for their short-term interest, and (2) making governance
radically open and transparent.

However, up until now, one of the major sore points for a cryptographic
protocol is how the protocol can fund and govern itself; the primary
solution, a centralized organization with a one-time token issuance and
presale, is basically a hack that generates *initial* funding and
*initial* governance at the cost of *initial* centralization. Token
sales, including our own Ethereum ether sale, have been a controversial
topic, to a large extent because they introduce this blemish of
centralization into what is otherwise a pure and decentralized
cryptosystem; however, if a new protocol starts off issuing itself as a
futarchy from day one, then that protocol can achieve incentivization
without centralization – one of the [key
breakthroughs](http://bitcoinmagazine.com/9435/markets-institutions-currencies-new-method-social-incentivization/)
in economics that make the cryptocurrency space in general worth
watching.

Some may argue that inflationary token systems are undesirable and that
dilution is bad; however, an important point is that, if futarchy works,
this scheme is guaranteed to be at least as effective as a fixed-supply
currency, and in the presence of a nonzero quantity of potentially
satisfiable [public goods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_good) it
will be strictly superior. The argument is simple: it is always possible
to come up with a proposal that sends the funds to an unspendable
address, so any proposal that wins would have to win against that
baseline as well.

So what are the first protocols that we will see using futarchy?
Theoretically, any of the higher-level protocols that have their own
coin (eg. SWARM, StorJ, Maidsafe), but without their own blockchain,
could benefit from futarchy on top of Ethereum. All that they would need
to do is implement the futarchy in code (something which I [have started
to
do](https://github.com/ethereum/serpent/tree/master/examples/cyberdyne)
already), add a pretty user interface for the markets, and set it going.
Although technically every single futarchy that starts off will be
exactly the same, futarchy is
[Schelling-point](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Focal_point_(game_theory))-dependent;
if you create a website around one particular futarchy, label it
“decentralized insurance”, and gather a community around that idea, then
it will be more likely that that particular futarchy succeeds if it
actually follows through on the promise of decentralized insurance, and
so the market will favor proposals that actually have something to do
with that particular line of development.

If you are building a protocol that will have a blockchain but does not
yet, then you can use futarchy to manage a “protoshare” that will
eventually be converted over; and if you are building a protocol with a
blockchain from the start you can always include futarchy right into the
core blockchain code itself; the only change will be that you will need
to find something to replace the use of a “reference asset” (eg. 2^64^
hashes may work as a trust-free economic unit of account). Of course,
even in this form futarchy cannot be guaranteed to work; it is only an
experiment, and may well prove inferior to other mechanisms like liquid
democracy – or hybrid solutions may be best. But experiments are what
cryptocurrency is all about.

![profile](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0c2adc17a0896fef419d5a4a7cb15b7c?s=96)

#### Vitalik Buterin

[https://ethereum.org](https://ethereum.org)

-   [**](http://github.com/vbuterin)
-   [**](https://blog.ethereum.org/feed/)

[**View Comments (0) ...](javascript:;)

**Navigation

**

-   [www](https://www.ethereum.org)
-   [forums](http://forum.ethereum.org/)
-   [wiki](http://wiki.ethereum.org)
-   [reddit](http://reddit.com/r/ethereum)
-   [twitter](https://twitter.com/ethereumproject)
-   [facebook](https://www.facebook.com/ethereumproject)
-   [google+](https://plus.google.com/+EthereumOrgOfficial/posts)
-   [youtube](https://www.youtube.com/user/ethereumproject)

[**](javascript:;)

#### Recent Posts

-   [An Introduction to
    Futarchy](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/21/introduction-futarchy/)
-   [building the decentralized web
    3.0](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/18/building-decentralized-web/)
-   [Secret Sharing and Erasure Coding: A Guide for the Aspiring Dropbox
    Decentralizer](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/16/secret-sharing-erasure-coding-guide-aspiring-dropbox-decentralizer/)
-   [Announcement on planned withdrawal from
    exodus](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/08/announcement-on-planned-exodus-withdrawal/)
-   [Ether Sale: A Statistical
    Overview](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/08/ether-sale-a-statistical-overview/)

#### Recent Comments

-   Taylor Gerring on [building the decentralized web
    3.0](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/18/building-decentralized-web/#comment-949)
-   Jako on [Ether Purchase
    Troubleshooting](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/07/23/ether-purchase-troubleshooting/#comment-948)
-   Mike H on [Secret Sharing and Erasure Coding: A Guide for the
    Aspiring Dropbox
    Decentralizer](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/16/secret-sharing-erasure-coding-guide-aspiring-dropbox-decentralizer/#comment-947)
-   [Taylor Gerring](http://www.taylorgerring.com) on [building the
    decentralized web
    3.0](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/18/building-decentralized-web/#comment-946)
-   gabriel munteanu on [building the decentralized web
    3.0](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/18/building-decentralized-web/#comment-945)

* * * * *

Copyright © [ethereum blog](https://blog.ethereum.org/). 2014 • All
rights reserved. Proudly published with
[WordPress](http://wordpress.org).

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/08/21/introduction-futarchy/
