### Navigation

-   [index](../genindex.html "General Index")
-   [modules](../py-modindex.html "Python Module Index") |
-   [modules](../np-modindex.html "Python Module Index") |
-   [next](calculus.html "Calculus") |
-   [previous](basic_operations.html "Basic Operations") |
-   [SymPy 0.7.4.1 documentation](../index.html) »
-   [SymPy Tutorial](index.html) »

Simplification[¶](#simplification "Permalink to this headline")
===============================================================

To make this document easier to read, we are going to enable pretty
printing.

    >>> from sympy import *
    >>> x, y, z = symbols('x y z')
    >>> init_printing(use_unicode=True)

`simplify`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#simplify "Permalink to this headline")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now let’s jump in and do some interesting mathematics. One of the most
useful features of a symbolic manipulation system is the ability to
simplify mathematical expressions. SymPy has dozens of functions to
perform various kinds of simplification. There is also one general
function called `simplify`{.docutils .literal} that attempts to apply
all of these functions in an intelligent way to arrive at the simplest
form of an expression. Here are some examples

    >>> simplify(sin(x)**2 + cos(x)**2)
    1
    >>> simplify((x**3 + x**2 - x - 1)/(x**2 + 2*x + 1))
    x - 1
    >>> simplify(gamma(x)/gamma(x - 2))
    (x - 2)⋅(x - 1)

Here, `gamma(x)`{.docutils .literal} is \\(\\Gamma(x)\\), the [gamma
function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_function). We see that
`simplify`{.docutils .literal} is capable of handling a large class of
expressions.

But `simplify`{.docutils .literal} has a pitfall. It just applies all
the major simplification operations in SymPy, and uses heuristics to
determine the simplest result. But “simplest” is not a well-defined
term. For example, say we wanted to “simplify” \\(x\^2 + 2x + 1\\) into
\\((x + 1)\^2\\):

    >>> simplify(x**2 + 2*x + 1)
     2
    x  + 2⋅x + 1

We did not get what we want. There is a function to perform this
simplification, called `factor`{.docutils .literal}, which will be
discussed below.

Another pitfall to `simplify`{.docutils .literal}, which is that it can
be unnecessarily slow, since it tries many kinds of simplifications
before picking the best one. If you already know exactly what kind of
simplification you are after, it is better to apply the specific
simplification function(s) that apply those simplifications.

Applying specific simplification functions instead of
`simplify`{.docutils .literal} also has the advantage that specific
functions have certain guarantees about the form of their output. These
will be discussed with each function below. For example,
`factor`{.docutils .literal}, when called on a polynomial with rational
coefficients, is guaranteed to factor the polynomial into irreducible
factors. `simplify`{.docutils .literal} has no guarantees. It is
entirely heuristical, and, as we saw above, it may even miss a possible
type of simplification that SymPy is capable of doing.

`simplify`{.docutils .literal} is best when used interactively, when you
just want to whittle down an expression to a simpler form. You may then
choose to apply specific functions once you see what
`simplify`{.docutils .literal} returns, to get a more precise result. It
is also useful when you have no idea what form an expression will take,
and you need a catchall function to simplify it.

Polynomial/Rational Function Simplification[¶](#polynomial-rational-function-simplification "Permalink to this headline")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### `expand`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#expand "Permalink to this headline")

`expand`{.docutils .literal} is one of the most common simplification
functions in SymPy. Although it has a lot of scopes, for now, we will
consider its function in expanding polynomial expressions. For example:

    >>> expand((x + 1)**2)
     2
    x  + 2⋅x + 1
    >>> expand((x + 2)*(x - 3))
     2
    x  - x - 6

Given a polynomial, `expand`{.docutils .literal} will put it into a
canonical form of a sum of monomials.

`expand`{.docutils .literal} may not sound like a simplification
function. After all, by its very name, it makes expressions bigger, not
smaller. Usually this is the case, but often an expression will become
smaller upon calling `expand`{.docutils .literal} on it due to
cancellation

    >>> expand((x + 1)*(x - 2) - (x - 1)*x)
    -2

### `factor`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#factor "Permalink to this headline")

`factor`{.docutils .literal} takes a polynomial and factors it into
irreducible factors over the rational numbers. For example:

    >>> factor(x**3 - x**2 + x - 1)
            ⎛ 2    ⎞
    (x - 1)⋅⎝x  + 1⎠
    >>> factor(x**2*z + 4*x*y*z + 4*y**2*z)
               2
    z⋅(x + 2⋅y)

For polynomials, `factor`{.docutils .literal} is the opposite of
`expand`{.docutils .literal}. `factor`{.docutils .literal} uses a
complete multivariate factorization algorithm over the rational numbers,
which means that each of the factors returned by `factor`{.docutils
.literal} is guaranteed to be irreducible.

If you are interested in the factors themselves, `factor_list`{.docutils
.literal} returns a more structured output.

    >>> factor_list(x**2*z + 4*x*y*z + 4*y**2*z)
    (1, [(z, 1), (x + 2⋅y, 2)])

Note that the input to `factor`{.docutils .literal} and
`expand`{.docutils .literal} need not be polynomials in the strict
sense. They will intelligently factor or expand any kind of expression
(though note that the factors may not be irreducible if the input is no
longer a polynomial over the rationals).

    >>> expand((cos(x) + sin(x))**2)
       2                           2
    sin (x) + 2⋅sin(x)⋅cos(x) + cos (x)
    >>> factor(cos(x)**2 + 2*cos(x)*sin(x) + sin(x)**2)
                     2
    (sin(x) + cos(x))

### `collect`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#collect "Permalink to this headline")

`collect`{.docutils .literal} collects common powers of a term in an
expression. For example

    >>> expr = x*y + x - 3 + 2*x**2 - z*x**2 + x**3
    >>> expr
     3    2        2
    x  - x ⋅z + 2⋅x  + x⋅y + x - 3
    >>> collected_expr = collect(expr, x)
    >>> collected_expr
     3    2
    x  + x ⋅(-z + 2) + x⋅(y + 1) - 3

`collect`{.docutils .literal} is particularly useful in conjunction with
the `.coeff`{.docutils .literal} method. `expr.coeff(x, n)`{.docutils
.literal} gives the coefficient of `x**n`{.docutils .literal} in
`expr`{.docutils .literal}:

    >>> collected_expr.coeff(x, 2)
    -z + 2

### `cancel`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#cancel "Permalink to this headline")

`cancel`{.docutils .literal} will take any rational function and put it
into the standard canonical form, \\(\\frac{p}{q}\\), where \\(p\\) and
\\(q\\) are expanded polynomials with no common factors, and the leading
coefficients of \\(p\\) and \\(q\\) do not have denominators (i.e., are
integers).

    >>> cancel((x**2 + 2*x + 1)/(x**2 + x))
    x + 1
    ─────
      x

    >>> expr = 1/x + (3*x/2 - 2)/(x - 4)
    >>> expr
    3⋅x
    ─── - 2
     2        1
    ─────── + ─
     x - 4    x
    >>> cancel(expr)
       2
    3⋅x  - 2⋅x - 8
    ──────────────
         2
      2⋅x  - 8⋅x

    >>> expr = (x*y**2 - 2*x*y*z + x*z**2 + y**2 - 2*y*z + z**2)/(x**2 - 1)
    >>> expr
       2                2    2            2
    x⋅y  - 2⋅x⋅y⋅z + x⋅z  + y  - 2⋅y⋅z + z
    ───────────────────────────────────────
                      2
                     x  - 1
    >>> cancel(expr)
     2            2
    y  - 2⋅y⋅z + z
    ───────────────
         x - 1

Note that since `factor`{.docutils .literal} will completely factorize
both the numerator and the denominator of an expression, it can also be
used to do the same thing:

    >>> factor(expr)
           2
    (y - z)
    ────────
     x - 1

However, if you are only interested in making sure that the expression
is in canceled form, `cancel`{.docutils .literal} is more efficient than
`factor`{.docutils .literal}.

### `apart`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#apart "Permalink to this headline")

`apart`{.docutils .literal} performs a [partial fraction
decomposition](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_fraction_decomposition)
on a rational function.

    >>> expr = (4*x**3 + 21*x**2 + 10*x + 12)/(x**4 + 5*x**3 + 5*x**2 + 4*x)
    >>> expr
       3       2
    4⋅x  + 21⋅x  + 10⋅x + 12
    ────────────────────────
      4      3      2
     x  + 5⋅x  + 5⋅x  + 4⋅x
    >>> apart(expr)
     2⋅x - 1       1     3
    ────────── - ───── + ─
     2           x + 4   x
    x  + x + 1

Trigonometric Simplification[¶](#trigonometric-simplification "Permalink to this headline")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note

SymPy follows Python’s naming conventions for inverse trigonometric
functions, which is to append an `a`{.docutils .literal} to the front of
the function’s name. For example, the inverse cosine, or arc cosine, is
called `acos`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> acos(x)
    acos(x)
    >>> cos(acos(x))
    x
    >>> asin(1)
    π
    ─
    2

### `trigsimp`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#trigsimp "Permalink to this headline")

To simplify expressions using trigonometric identities, use
`trigsimp`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> trigsimp(sin(x)**2 + cos(x)**2)
    1
    >>> trigsimp(sin(x)**4 - 2*cos(x)**2*sin(x)**2 + cos(x)**4)
    cos(4⋅x)   1
    ──────── + ─
       2       2
    >>> trigsimp(sin(x)*tan(x)/sec(x))
       2
    sin (x)

`trigsimp`{.docutils .literal} also works with hyperbolic trig
functions.

    >>> trigsimp(cosh(x)**2 + sinh(x)**2)
    cosh(2⋅x)
    >>> trigsimp(sinh(x)/tanh(x))
    cosh(x)

Much like `simplify`{.docutils .literal}, `trigsimp`{.docutils .literal}
applies various trigonometric identities to the input expression, and
then uses a heuristic to return the “best” one.

### `expand_trig`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#expand-trig "Permalink to this headline")

To expand trigonometric functions, that is, apply the sum or double
angle identities, use `expand_trig`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> expand_trig(sin(x + y))
    sin(x)⋅cos(y) + sin(y)⋅cos(x)
    >>> expand_trig(tan(2*x))
       2⋅tan(x)
    ─────────────
         2
    - tan (x) + 1

Because `expand_trig`{.docutils .literal} tends to make trigonometric
expressions larger, and `trigsimp`{.docutils .literal} tends to make
them smaller, these identities can be applied in reverse using
`trigsimp`{.docutils .literal}

    >>> trigsimp(sin(x)*cos(y) + sin(y)*cos(x))
    sin(x + y)

Powers[¶](#powers "Permalink to this headline")
-----------------------------------------------

Before we introduce the power simplification functions, a mathematical
discussion on the identities held by powers is in order. There are three
kinds of identities satisfied by exponents

1.  \\(x\^ax\^b = x\^{a + b}\\)
2.  \\(x\^ay\^a = (xy)\^a\\)
3.  \\((x\^a)\^b = x\^{ab}\\)

Identity 1 is always true.

Identity 2 is not always true. For example, if \\(x = y = -1\\) and \\(a
= \\frac{1}{2}\\), then \\(x\^ay\^a = \\sqrt{-1}\\sqrt{-1} = i\\cdot i =
-1\\), whereas \\((xy)\^a = \\sqrt{-1\\cdot-1} = \\sqrt{1} = 1\\).
However, identity 2 is true at least if \\(x\\) and \\(y\\) are
nonnegative and \\(a\\) is real (it may also be true under other
conditions as well). A common consequence of the failure of identity 2
is that \\(\\sqrt{x}\\sqrt{y} \\neq \\sqrt{xy}\\).

Identity 3 is not always true. For example, if \\(x = -1\\), \\(a =
2\\), and \\(b = \\frac{1}{2}\\), then \\((x\^a)\^b = {\\left
((-1)\^2\\right )}\^{1/2} = \\sqrt{1} = 1\\) and \\(x\^{ab} =
(-1)\^{2\\cdot1/2} = (-1)\^1 = -1\\). However, identity 3 is true at
least if \\(x\\) is nonnegative or \\(b\\) is an integer (again, it may
also hold in other cases as well). Two common consequences of the
failure of identity 3 are that \\(\\sqrt{x\^2}\\neq x\\) and that
\\(\\sqrt{\\frac{1}{x}} \\neq \\frac{1}{\\sqrt{x}}\\).

To summarize

Identity

Sufficient conditions to hold

Counterexample when conditions are not met

Important consequences

1.  \\(x\^ax\^b = x\^{a + b}\\)

Always true

None

None

2.  \\(x\^ay\^a = (xy)\^a\\)

\\(x, y \\geq 0\\) and \\(a \\in \\mathbb{R}\\)

\\((-1)\^{1/2}(-1)\^{1/2} \\neq (-1\\cdot-1)\^{1/2}\\)

\\(\\sqrt{x}\\sqrt{y} \\neq \\sqrt{xy}\\) in general

3.  \\((x\^a)\^b = x\^{ab}\\)

\\(x \\geq 0\\) or \\(b \\in \\mathbb{Z}\\)

\\({\\left((-1)\^2\\right )}\^{1/2} \\neq (-1)\^{2\\cdot1/2}\\)

\\(\\sqrt{x\^2}\\neq x\\) and
\\(\\sqrt{\\frac{1}{x}}\\neq\\frac{1}{\\sqrt{x}}\\) in general

This is important to remember, because by default, SymPy will not
perform simplifications if they are not true in general.

In order to make SymPy perform simplifications involving identities that
are only true under certain assumptions, we need to put assumptions on
our Symbols. We will undertake a full discussion of the assumptions
system later, but for now, all we need to know are the following.

-   By default, SymPy Symbols are assumed to be complex (elements of
    \\(\\mathbb{C}\\)). That is, a simplification will not be applied to
    an expression with a given Symbol unless it holds for all complex
    numbers.

-   Symbols can be given different assumptions by passing the assumption
    to `symbols`{.docutils .literal}. For the rest of this section, we
    will be assuming that `x`{.docutils .literal} and `y`{.docutils
    .literal} are positive, and that `a`{.docutils .literal} and
    `b`{.docutils .literal} are real. We will leave `z`{.docutils
    .literal}, `t`{.docutils .literal}, and `c`{.docutils .literal} as
    arbitrary complex Symbols to demonstrate what happens in that case.

        >>> x, y = symbols('x y', positive=True)
        >>> a, b = symbols('a b', real=True)
        >>> z, t, c = symbols('z t c')

Note

In SymPy, `sqrt(x)`{.docutils .literal} is just a shortcut to
`x**Rational(1, 2)`{.docutils .literal}. They are exactly the same
object.

    >>> sqrt(x) == x**Rational(1, 2)
    True

### `powsimp`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#powsimp "Permalink to this headline")

`powsimp`{.docutils .literal} applies identities 1 and 2 from above,
from left to right.

    >>> powsimp(x**a*x**b)
      a + b
     x
    >>> powsimp(x**a*y**a)
         a
    (x⋅y)

Notice that `powsimp`{.docutils .literal} refuses to do the
simplification if it is not valid.

    >>> powsimp(t**c*z**c)
     c  c
    t ⋅z

If you know that you want to apply this simplification, but you don’t
want to mess with assumptions, you can pass the `force=True`{.docutils
.literal} flag. This will force the simplification to take place,
regardless of assumptions.

    >>> powsimp(t**c*z**c, force=True)
         c
    (t⋅z)

Note that in some instances, in particular, when the exponents are
integers or rational numbers, and identity 2 holds, it will be applied
automatically

    >>> (z*t)**2
      2  2
     t ⋅z
    >>> sqrt(x*y)
       ___   ___
     ╲╱ x ⋅╲╱ y

This means that it will be impossible to undo this identity with
`powsimp`{.docutils .literal}, because even if `powsimp`{.docutils
.literal} were to put the bases together, they would be automatically
split apart again.

    >>> powsimp(z**2*t**2)
      2  2
     t ⋅z
    >>> powsimp(sqrt(x)*sqrt(y))
       ___   ___
     ╲╱ x ⋅╲╱ y

### `expand_power_exp`{.docutils .literal} / `expand_power_base`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#expand-power-exp-expand-power-base "Permalink to this headline")

`expand_power_exp`{.docutils .literal} and `expand_power_base`{.docutils
.literal} apply identities 1 and 2 from right to left, respectively.

    >>> expand_power_exp(x**(a + b))
     a  b
    x ⋅x

    >>> expand_power_base((x*y)**a)
     a  a
    x ⋅y

As with `powsimp`{.docutils .literal}, identity 2 is not applied if it
is not valid.

    >>> expand_power_base((z*t)**c)
         c
    (t⋅z)

And as with `powsimp`{.docutils .literal}, you can force the expansion
to happen without fiddling with assumptions by using
`force=True`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> expand_power_base((z*t)**c, force=True)
      c  c
     t ⋅z

As with identity 2, identity 1 is applied automatically if the power is
a number, and hence cannot be undone with `expand_power_exp`{.docutils
.literal}.

    >>> x**2*x**3
      5
     x
    >>> expand_power_exp(x**5)
      5
     x

### `powdenest`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#powdenest "Permalink to this headline")

`powdenest`{.docutils .literal} applies identity 3, from left to right.

    >>> powdenest((x**a)**b)
     a⋅b
    x

As before, the identity is not applied if it is not true under the given
assumptions.

    >>> powdenest((z**a)**b)
        b
    ⎛ a⎞
    ⎝z ⎠

And as before, this can be manually overridden with
`force=True`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> powdenest((z**a)**b, force=True)
     a⋅b
    z

Exponentials and logarithms[¶](#exponentials-and-logarithms "Permalink to this headline")
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note

In SymPy, as in Python and most programming languages, `log`{.docutils
.literal} is the natural logarithm, also known as `ln`{.docutils
.literal}. SymPy automatically provides an alias `ln = log`{.docutils
.literal} in case you forget this.

    >>> ln(x)
    log(x)

Logarithms have similar issues as powers. There are two main identities

1.  \\(\\log{(xy)} = \\log{(x)} + \\log{(y)}\\)
2.  \\(\\log{(x\^n)} = n\\log{(x)}\\)

Neither identity is true for arbitrary complex \\(x\\) and \\(y\\), due
to the branch cut in the complex plane for the complex logarithm.
However, sufficient conditions for the identities to hold are if \\(x\\)
and \\(y\\) are positive and \\(n\\) is real.

    >>> x, y = symbols('x y', positive=True)
    >>> n = symbols('n', real=True)

As before, `z`{.docutils .literal} and `t`{.docutils .literal} will be
Symbols with no additional assumptions.

Note that the identity \\(\\log{\\left (\\frac{x}{y}\\right )} =
\\log(x) - \\log(y)\\) is a special case of identities 1 and 2 by
\\(\\log{\\left (\\frac{x}{y}\\right )} =\\) \\(\\log{\\left
(x\\cdot\\frac{1}{y}\\right )} =\\) \\(\\log(x) + \\log{\\left(
y\^{-1}\\right )} =\\) \\(\\log(x) - \\log(y)\\), and thus it also holds
if \\(x\\) and \\(y\\) are positive, but may not hold in general.

We also see that \\(\\log{\\left( e\^x \\right)} = x\\) comes from
\\(\\log{\\left ( e\^x \\right)} = x\\log(e) = x\\), and thus holds when
\\(x\\) is real (and it can be verified that it does not hold in general
for arbitrary complex \\(x\\), for example, \\(\\log{\\left (e\^{x +
2\\pi i}\\right)} = \\log{\\left (e\^x\\right )} = x \\neq x + 2\\pi
i\\)).

### `expand_log`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#expand-log "Permalink to this headline")

To apply identities 1 and 2 from left to right, use
`expand_log`{.docutils .literal}. As always, the identities will not be
applied unless they are valid.

    >>> expand_log(log(x*y))
    log(x) + log(y)
    >>> expand_log(log(x/y))
    log(x) - log(y)
    >>> expand_log(log(x**2))
    2⋅log(x)
    >>> expand_log(log(x**n))
    n⋅log(x)
    >>> expand_log(log(z*t))
    log(t⋅z)

As with `powsimp`{.docutils .literal} and `powdenest`{.docutils
.literal}, `expand_log`{.docutils .literal} has a `force`{.docutils
.literal} option that can be used to ignore assumptions.

    >>> expand_log(log(z**2))
       ⎛ 2⎞
    log⎝z ⎠
    >>> expand_log(log(z**2), force=True)
    2⋅log(z)

### `logcombine`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#logcombine "Permalink to this headline")

To apply identities 1 and 2 from right to left, use
`logcombine`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> logcombine(log(x) + log(y))
    log(x⋅y)
    >>> logcombine(n*log(x))
       ⎛ n⎞
    log⎝x ⎠
    >>> logcombine(n*log(z))
    n⋅log(z)

`logcombine`{.docutils .literal} also has a `force`{.docutils .literal}
option that can be used to ignore assumptions.

    >>> logcombine(n*log(z), force=True)
       ⎛ n⎞
    log⎝z ⎠

Special Functions[¶](#special-functions "Permalink to this headline")
---------------------------------------------------------------------

SymPy implements dozens of special functions, ranging from functions in
combinatorics to mathematical physics.

An extensive list of the special functions included with SymPy and their
documentation is at the [*Functions
Module*](../modules/functions/index.html#functions-contents) page.

For the purposes of this tutorial, let’s introduce a few special
functions in SymPy.

Let’s define `x`{.docutils .literal}, `y`{.docutils .literal}, and
`z`{.docutils .literal} as regular, complex Symbols, removing any
assumptions we put on them in the previous section. We will also define
`k`{.docutils .literal}, `m`{.docutils .literal}, and `n`{.docutils
.literal}.

    >>> x, y, z = symbols('x y z')
    >>> k, m, n = symbols('k m n')

The [factorial](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factorial) function is
`factorial`{.docutils .literal}. `factorial(n)`{.docutils .literal}
represents \\(n!= 1\\cdot2\\cdots(n - 1)\\cdot n\\). \\(n!\\) represents
the number of permutations of \\(n\\) distinct items.

    >>> factorial(n)
    n!

The [binomial
coefficient](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_coefficient) function
is `binomial`{.docutils .literal}. `binomial(n, k)`{.docutils .literal}
represents \\(\\binom{n}{k}\\), the number of ways to choose \\(k\\)
items from a set of \\(n\\) distinct items. It is also often written as
\\(nCk\\), and is pronounced “\\(n\\) choose \\(k\\)”.

    >>> binomial(n, k)
    ⎛n⎞
    ⎜ ⎟
    ⎝k⎠

The factorial function is closely related to the [gamma
function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_function),
`gamma`{.docutils .literal}. `gamma(z)`{.docutils .literal} represents
\\(\\Gamma(z) = \\int\_0\^\\infty t\^{z - 1}e\^{-t}\\,dt\\), which for
positive integer \\(z\\) is the same as \\((z - 1)!\\).

    >>> gamma(z)
    Γ(z)

The [generalized hypergeometric
function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized_hypergeometric_function)
is `hyper`{.docutils .literal}.
`hyper([a_1, ..., a_p], [b_1, ..., b_q], z)`{.docutils .literal}
represents \\({}\_pF\_q\\left(\\begin{matrix} a\_1, \\dots, a\_p \\\\
b\_1, \\dots, b\_q \\end{matrix} \\middle| z \\right)\\). The most
common case is \\({}\_2F\_1\\), which is often referred to as the
[ordinary hypergeometric
function](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypergeometric_function).

    >>> hyper([1, 2], [3], z)
     ┌─  ⎛1, 2 │  ⎞
     ├─  ⎜     │ z⎟
    2╵ 1 ⎝ 3   │  ⎠

### `rewrite`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#rewrite "Permalink to this headline")

A common way to deal with special functions is to rewrite them in terms
of one another. This works for any function in SymPy, not just special
functions. To rewrite an expression in terms of a function, use
`expr.rewrite(function)`{.docutils .literal}. For example,

    >>> tan(x).rewrite(sin)
         2
    2⋅sin (x)
    ─────────
     sin(2⋅x)
    >>> factorial(x).rewrite(gamma)
    Γ(x + 1)

For some tips on applying more targeted rewriting, see the [*Advanced
Expression Manipulation*](manipulation.html#tutorial-manipulation)
section.

### `expand_func`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#expand-func "Permalink to this headline")

To expand special functions in terms of some identities, use
`expand_func`{.docutils .literal}. For example

    >>> expand_func(gamma(x + 3))
    x⋅(x + 1)⋅(x + 2)⋅Γ(x)

### `hyperexpand`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#hyperexpand "Permalink to this headline")

To rewrite `hyper`{.docutils .literal} in terms of more standard
functions, use `hyperexpand`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> hyperexpand(hyper([1, 1], [2], z))
    -log(-z + 1)
    ─────────────
         z

`hyperexpand`{.docutils .literal} also works on the more general Meijer
G-function (see [`its documentation`{.xref .py .py-meth .docutils
.literal}](../modules/functions/special.html#sympy.functions.special.hyper.meijerg "sympy.functions.special.hyper.meijerg")
for more information).

    >>> expr = meijerg([[1],[1]], [[1],[]], -z)
    >>> expr
    ╭─╮1, 1 ⎛1  1 │   ⎞
    │╶┐     ⎜     │ -z⎟
    ╰─╯2, 1 ⎝1    │   ⎠
    >>> hyperexpand(expr)
     1
     ─
     z
    ℯ

### `combsimp`{.docutils .literal}[¶](#combsimp "Permalink to this headline")

To simplify combinatorial expressions, use `combsimp`{.docutils
.literal}.

    >>> combsimp(factorial(n)/factorial(n - 3))
    n⋅(n - 2)⋅(n - 1)
    >>> combsimp(binomial(n+1, k+1)/binomial(n, k))
    n + 1
    ─────
    k + 1

`combsimp`{.docutils .literal} also simplifies expressions with
`gamma`{.docutils .literal}.

    >>> combsimp(gamma(x)*gamma(1 - x))
       π
    ────────
    sin(π⋅x)

Example: Continued Fractions[¶](#example-continued-fractions "Permalink to this headline")
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let’s use SymPy to explore continued fractions. A [continued
fraction](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continued_fraction) is an
expression of the form

\\[a\_0 + \\cfrac{1}{a\_1 + \\cfrac{1}{a\_2 + \\cfrac{1}{ \\ddots +
\\cfrac{1}{a\_n} }}}\\]

where \\(a\_0, \\ldots, a\_n\\) are integers, and \\(a\_1, \\ldots,
a\_n\\) are positive. A continued fraction can also be infinite, but
infinite objects are more difficult to represent in computers, so we
will only examine the finite case here.

A continued fraction of the above form is often represented as a list
\\([a\_0; a\_1, \\ldots, a\_n]\\). Let’s write a simple function that
converts such a list to its continued fraction form. The easiest way to
construct a continued fraction from a list is to work backwards. Note
that despite the apparent symmetry of the definition, the first element,
\\(a\_0\\), must usually be handled differently from the rest.

    >>> def list_to_frac(l):
    ...     expr = Integer(0)
    ...     for i in reversed(l[1:]):
    ...         expr += i
    ...         expr = 1/expr
    ...     return l[0] + expr
    >>> list_to_frac([x, y, z])
          1
    x + ─────
            1
        y + ─
            z

We use `Integer(0)`{.docutils .literal} in `list_to_frac`{.docutils
.literal} so that the result will always be a SymPy object, even if we
only pass in Python ints.

    >>> list_to_frac([1, 2, 3, 4])
    43
    ──
    30

Every finite continued fraction is a rational number, but we are
interested in symbolics here, so let’s create a symbolic continued
fraction. The `symbols`{.docutils .literal} function that we have been
using has a shortcut to create numbered symbols.
`symbols('a0:5')`{.docutils .literal} will create the symbols
`a0`{.docutils .literal}, `a1`{.docutils .literal}, ..., `a5`{.docutils
.literal}.

    >>> syms = symbols('a0:5')
    >>> syms
    (a₀, a₁, a₂, a₃, a₄)
    >>> a0, a1, a2, a3, a4 = syms
    >>> frac = list_to_frac(syms)
    >>> frac
                 1
    a₀ + ─────────────────
                   1
         a₁ + ────────────
                      1
              a₂ + ───────
                        1
                   a₃ + ──
                        a₄

This form is useful for understanding continued fractions, but lets put
it into standard rational function form using `cancel`{.docutils
.literal}.

    >>> frac = cancel(frac)
    >>> frac
    a₀⋅a₁⋅a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₀⋅a₁⋅a₂ + a₀⋅a₁⋅a₄ + a₀⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₀ + a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₂ + a₄
    ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
                     a₁⋅a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₁⋅a₂ + a₁⋅a₄ + a₃⋅a₄ + 1

Now suppose we were given `frac`{.docutils .literal} in the above
canceled form. In fact, we might be given the fraction in any form, but
we can always put it into the above canonical form with
`cancel`{.docutils .literal}. Suppose that we knew that it could be
rewritten as a continued fraction. How could we do this with SymPy? A
continued fraction is recursively \\(c + \\frac{1}{f}\\), where \\(c\\)
is an integer and \\(f\\) is a (smaller) continued fraction. If we could
write the expression in this form, we could pull out each \\(c\\)
recursively and add it to a list. We could then get a continued fraction
with our `list_to_frac`{.docutils .literal} function.

The key observation here is that we can convert an expression to the
form \\(c + \\frac{1}{f}\\) by doing a partial fraction decomposition
with respect to \\(c\\). This is because \\(f\\) does not contain
\\(c\\). This means we need to use the `apart`{.docutils .literal}
function. We use `apart`{.docutils .literal} to pull the term out, then
subtract it from the expression, and take the reciprocal to get the
\\(f\\) part.

    >>> l = []
    >>> frac = apart(frac, a0)
    >>> frac
                    a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₂ + a₄
    a₀ + ───────────────────────────────────────
         a₁⋅a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₁⋅a₂ + a₁⋅a₄ + a₃⋅a₄ + 1
    >>> l.append(a0)
    >>> frac = 1/(frac - a0)
    >>> frac
    a₁⋅a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₁⋅a₂ + a₁⋅a₄ + a₃⋅a₄ + 1
    ───────────────────────────────────────
               a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₂ + a₄

Now we repeat this process

    >>> frac = apart(frac, a1)
    >>> frac
             a₃⋅a₄ + 1
    a₁ + ──────────────────
         a₂⋅a₃⋅a₄ + a₂ + a₄
    >>> l.append(a1)
    >>> frac = 1/(frac - a1)
    >>> frac = apart(frac, a2)
    >>> frac
             a₄
    a₂ + ─────────
         a₃⋅a₄ + 1
    >>> l.append(a2)
    >>> frac = 1/(frac - a2)
    >>> frac = apart(frac, a3)
    >>> frac
         1
    a₃ + ──
         a₄
    >>> l.append(a3)
    >>> frac = 1/(frac - a3)
    >>> frac = apart(frac, a4)
    >>> frac
    a₄
    >>> l.append(a4)
    >>> list_to_frac(l)
                 1
    a₀ + ─────────────────
                   1
         a₁ + ────────────
                      1
              a₂ + ───────
                        1
                   a₃ + ──
                        a₄

Quick Tip

You can execute multiple lines at once in SymPy Live. Typing
`Shift-Enter`{.docutils .literal} instead of `Enter`{.docutils .literal}
will enter a newline instead of executing.

Of course, this exercise seems pointless, because we already know that
our `frac`{.docutils .literal} is
`list_to_frac([a0, a1, a2, a3, a4])`{.docutils .literal}. So try the
following exercise. Take a list of symbols and randomize them, and
create the canceled continued fraction, and see if you can reproduce the
original list. For example

    >>> import random
    >>> l = list(symbols('a0:5'))
    >>> random.shuffle(l)
    >>> orig_frac = frac = cancel(list_to_frac(l))
    >>> del l

Click on “Run code block in SymPy Live” on the definition of
`list_to_frac`{.docutils .literal} above, and then on the above example,
and try to reproduce `l`{.docutils .literal} from `frac`{.docutils
.literal}. I have deleted `l`{.docutils .literal} at the end to remove
the temptation for peeking (you can check your answer at the end by
calling `cancel(list_to_frac(l))`{.docutils .literal} on the list that
you generate at the end, and comparing it to `orig_frac`{.docutils
.literal}.

See if you can think of a way to figure out what symbol to pass to
`apart`{.docutils .literal} at each stage (hint: think of what happens
to \\(a\_0\\) in the formula \\(a\_0 + \\frac{1}{a\_1 + \\cdots}\\) when
it is canceled).

[![Logo](../_static/sympylogo.png)](../index.html)

### [Table Of Contents](../index.html)

-   [Simplification](#)
    -   [`simplify`{.docutils .literal}](#simplify)
    -   [Polynomial/Rational Function
        Simplification](#polynomial-rational-function-simplification)
        -   [`expand`{.docutils .literal}](#expand)
        -   [`factor`{.docutils .literal}](#factor)
        -   [`collect`{.docutils .literal}](#collect)
        -   [`cancel`{.docutils .literal}](#cancel)
        -   [`apart`{.docutils .literal}](#apart)

    -   [Trigonometric Simplification](#trigonometric-simplification)
        -   [`trigsimp`{.docutils .literal}](#trigsimp)
        -   [`expand_trig`{.docutils .literal}](#expand-trig)

    -   [Powers](#powers)
        -   [`powsimp`{.docutils .literal}](#powsimp)
        -   [`expand_power_exp`{.docutils .literal} /
            `expand_power_base`{.docutils
            .literal}](#expand-power-exp-expand-power-base)
        -   [`powdenest`{.docutils .literal}](#powdenest)

    -   [Exponentials and logarithms](#exponentials-and-logarithms)
        -   [`expand_log`{.docutils .literal}](#expand-log)
        -   [`logcombine`{.docutils .literal}](#logcombine)

    -   [Special Functions](#special-functions)
        -   [`rewrite`{.docutils .literal}](#rewrite)
        -   [`expand_func`{.docutils .literal}](#expand-func)
        -   [`hyperexpand`{.docutils .literal}](#hyperexpand)
        -   [`combsimp`{.docutils .literal}](#combsimp)

    -   [Example: Continued Fractions](#example-continued-fractions)

#### Previous topic

[Basic Operations](basic_operations.html "previous chapter")

#### Next topic

[Calculus](calculus.html "next chapter")

### This Page

-   [Show Source](../_sources/tutorial/simplification.txt)

### Quick search

Enter search terms or a module, class or function name.

### Navigation

-   [index](../genindex.html "General Index")
-   [modules](../py-modindex.html "Python Module Index") |
-   [modules](../np-modindex.html "Python Module Index") |
-   [next](calculus.html "Calculus") |
-   [previous](basic_operations.html "Basic Operations") |
-   [SymPy 0.7.4.1 documentation](../index.html) »
-   [SymPy Tutorial](index.html) »

© Copyright 2013 SymPy Development Team. Last updated on Dec 15, 2013.
Created using [Sphinx](http://sphinx.pocoo.org/) 1.1.3.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://docs.sympy.org/latest/tutorial/simplification.html#simplify
