-   [home](/)
-   [about](/about)
-   [tumblr](http://the-may-king.tumblr.com)
-   [github](https://github.com/junegunn)

Writing my own Vim plugin manager

\2013. 09. 18.

As the title says, I've finally ended up writing my own Vim plugin
manager called [vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug), so
here's what happened.

State of the art
----------------

Today, we already have a whole range of Vim plugin managers, from the
minimalistic, the father of all,
[Pathogen](https://github.com/tpope/vim-pathogen) from the great
[tpope](http://tpo.pe/), to [Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle)
with which you get a nice usability improvement, and to seemingly the
most fully-featured
[NeoBundle](https://github.com/Shougo/neobundle.vim).

There are also a number of minorities such as
[vim-addon-manager](https://github.com/MarcWeber/vim-addon-manager) and
[oh-my-vim](https://github.com/gawel/oh-my-vim), both of which manage
the lists of available Vim plugins.

My choice was [Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle). I really
admire the simplicity of
[Pathogen](https://github.com/tpope/vim-pathogen), but I don't want to
manage git submodules, and having the explicit list of plugins in my
.vimrc gives me a better sense of control. Later I found that
[NeoBundle](https://github.com/Shougo/neobundle.vim) could be a nice
alternative, but realized that I didn't need any of its extra features
at that point, so I decided to stick with
[Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle).

Growing impatience
------------------

The number of plugins I use has been increased over time. Now I have
more than 30 plugins specified in my
[.vimrc](https://github.com/junegunn/dotfiles/blob/8646aae3aec418662d667b36444e771041ad0d23/vimrc#L12-L91).

Now with 30 of them, it takes a considerable amount of time to update
the plugins, or install them on a new machine. Maybe I'm exaggerating
the problem a bit since it still takes less than 5 minutes. I could just
fire up a new tmux session and do something else while they're being
done.

It was obvious that the time could be greatly reduced if I could update
plugins in parallel using multiple threads or processes. The simplest
method would be to write a shell script that spawns multiple background
processes each of which updates a plugin.

    #!/bin/bash

    cnt=0
    cd ~/.vim/bundle &&
    for d in *; do
      if [ -d $d/.git ]; then
        echo "Updating $d"
        cd $d && git pull &
        # Prevent having too many subprocesses
        (( (cnt += 1) % 16 == 0 )) && wait
      fi
    done
    wait

This simple script works pretty well if you have already installed the
plugins. Maybe this is how it should be done considering that Vim in
itself does not have any notion of parallel execution. But this
irrational Vim addict just couldn't stop wanting to do the whole thing
inside Vim without any external scripts.

Although Vim itself does not have threads or background processes, there
are a couple of workarounds.

1.  [NeoBundle](https://github.com/Shougo/neobundle.vim) supports
    parallel installation using multiple processes. However that
    requires compilation of another plugin called vimproc from the same
    author. As ~~my instinct told me to stay away from any compiled
    extension and~~ I wanted to simplify the initial setup process as
    much as possible, I looked for another option.

2.  With Ruby/Python interface we can create threads. I personally
    prefer Ruby and the current version of Mac OS X is shipped with a
    Ruby-enabled Vim, so I decided to write a parallel update procedure
    in Ruby.

And yes, it worked. You can see my first, now deprecated, prototype
implementation
[here](https://github.com/junegunn/vimfiles/commit/5806196), which uses
`g:bundles` variable from [Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle).

The next step
-------------

The obvious next step was to merge this parallel update procedure into
[Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle), so if a user is running a
Ruby-enabled Vim, [Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle) will
automatically install/update plugins in parallel. So many people would
benefit from this update! But sadly that didn't happen. I couldn't find
a place for my code in the [Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle)
codebase without introducing a major overhaul. Much of its logic relies
too much on the content of the status window. And it was instantly
obvious that it would require too much effort to make it flexible enough
to embrace my code.

I could just stop there. Using
[Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle) as it is with my own parallel
update function. But I then realized that I had accidentally
reimplemented the core part of
[Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle) by writing that piece of
code. Well then, why not just build my own custom-tailored plugin
manager that is easier for me to use and gives me just what I need? So
that's how [vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug) started.

Goals and achivements
---------------------

I wanted my own plugin manager to be as follows:

-   Should be easier to setup, require less boilerplate code
-   Minimal features
-   Of course, parallel installation and update
    -   But fall back to plain Vimscript when Ruby is not available

-   Be able to switch plugins of the same name from different authors

To summarize, it's positioned somewhere between
[Pathogen](https://github.com/tpope/vim-pathogen) and
[Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle), but with the new parallel
update feature.

[vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug) is indeed easier to
setup. To install [vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug) you
just need to download [a single file from
GitHub](https://raw.github.com/junegunn/vim-plug/master/plug.vim) and
put it in `~/.vim/autoload`.

    mkdir -p ~/.vim/autoload
    curl -fLo ~/.vim/autoload/plug.vim \
      https://raw.github.com/junegunn/vim-plug/master/plug.vim

And it doesn't require any unfathomable boilerplate code in your .vimrc,
you just write down the list of plugins with `Plug` command between
`plug#begin()` and `plug#end()`. That's all you have to do. (And you
see, `Plug` is 2-byte shorter than `Bundle`, so you save a huge amount
of disk space!)

    call plug#begin()

    Plug 'junegunn/seoul256'
    Plug 'junegunn/vim-easy-align'
    " Plug 'user/repo', 'branch_or_tag'
    " Plug 'git@github.com:junegunn/vim-github-dashboard.git'
    " ...

    call plug#end()

Now you are loaded with the essential PlugInstall, PlugUpdate,
PlugClean, and PlugUpgrade commands.

PlugInstall and PlugUpdate will install and update plugins in parallel
if you're running a Ruby-enabled Vim. It gives me an order of magnitude
speedup.

![image](https://raw.github.com/junegunn/i/master/vim-plug/pi.gif)

![image](https://raw.github.com/junegunn/i/master/vim-plug/pu.gif)

Notice that the status window doesn't look as nice as that of
[Vundle](https://github.com/gmarik/vundle), but well, that's good enough
for me, for now.

Status of vim-plug
------------------

*[vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug) works for me*. And
that's the whole point. I will not add any extra feature that I don't
think I need just because somebody wants it. I don't expect people to
abandon their current plugin managers and adopt
[vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug), and it is highly
likely that I will be the only one using it in the end, but I don't
care. It was fun building it, and I learned a lot more about Vim in the
process.

If you're still curious [try it, fork
it](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug), or even try writing a yet
another plugin manager for yourself. Why? Because you can, and it's a
lot of fun.

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

Â» capture | close

junegunn choi. 2013.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://junegunn.kr/2013/09/writing-my-own-vim-plugin-manager/
