[](http://www.inc.com/)

![image](http://images.inc.com/leftnavmenu/inc-logo-white.png)

![image](http://images.inc.com/leftnavmenu/search-magnifying-glass.png)

-   [THE INC. LIFE](http://www.inc.com/theinclife)
-   [STARTUP](http://www.inc.com/startup)
    -   [BEST INDUSTRIES](http://www.inc.com/best-industries-2013)
    -   [FUNDING](http://www.inc.com/money)
    -   [INCUBATORS](http://www.inc.com/incubators)
    -   [BUSINESS PLANS](http://www.inc.com/business-plans)
    -   [NAMING](http://www.inc.com/naming)
    -   [HOME-BASED BUSINESS](http://www.inc.com/home-based-business)

-   [GROW](http://www.inc.com/grow)
    -   [STRATEGY](http://www.inc.com/strategy)
    -   [OPERATIONS](http://www.inc.com/operations)
    -   [SALES](http://www.inc.com/sales)
    -   [MARKETING](http://www.inc.com/marketing)
    -   [CUSTOMER SERVICE](http://www.inc.com/customer-service)
    -   [FRANCHISES](http://www.inc.com/franchises)
    -   [BUILD](http://www.inc.com/build)

-   [LEAD](http://www.inc.com/lead)
    -   [COMPANY CULTURE](http://www.inc.com/company-culture)
    -   [PRODUCTIVITY](http://www.inc.com/productivity)
    -   [PUBLIC SPEAKING](http://www.inc.com/publicspeaking)
    -   [HIRING](http://www.inc.com/hiring)
    -   [HR/BENEFITS](http://www.inc.com/benefits-hr)
        [![image](http://www.inc.com/uploaded_files/leftnavmenuitem/UNUM_38.png)](http://servedby.flashtalking.com/click/3/33758;825029;50126;211;0/?ft_width=1&ft_height=1&url=5224414)
    -   [WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS](http://www.inc.com/women-in-business)
    -   [RISING STARS](http://www.inc.com/rising-stars)

-   [INNOVATE](http://www.inc.com/innovate)
    -   [BRAINSTORM](http://www.inc.com/brainstorm)
    -   [INVENT](http://www.inc.com/invent)
    -   [DESIGN](http://www.inc.com/design)
    -   [PIVOT](http://www.inc.com/pivot)

-   [TECHNOLOGY](http://www.inc.com/technology)
    -   [CLOUD COMPUTING](http://www.inc.com/cloud-computing)
    -   [SOCIAL MEDIA](http://www.inc.com/social-media)
    -   [SECURITY](http://www.inc.com/security)
    -   [BIG DATA](http://www.inc.com/data-detectives)

-   [MONEY](http://www.inc.com/money)
    -   [BOOTSTRAPPING](http://www.inc.com/bootstrapping)
    -   [CROWDFUNDING](http://www.inc.com/crowdfunding)
    -   [VENTURE CAPITAL](http://www.inc.com/venture-capital)
    -   [BORROWING](http://www.inc.com/debt-financing)
    -   [BUSINESS MODELS](http://www.inc.com/business-models)
    -   [PERSONAL FINANCE](http://www.inc.com/personal-finance)

-   [VIDEO](http://www.inc.com/inclive)
    -   [INC. LIVE](http://www.inc.com/inclive)
    -   [HOW I DID IT](http://www.inc.com/hidi)
    -   [FOUNDERS FORUM](http://www.inc.com/founders-forum)
    -   [TREP LIFE](http://www.inc.com/treplife)
    -   [PLAYBOOK](http://www.inc.com/playbook)
    -   [BRANSON UP CLOSE](http://www.inc.com/bransonupclose)
    -   [IDEA LAB](http://www.inc.com/idealab)

-   [INC. 5000](http://www.inc.com/inc5000/list/2014)
-   [SPECIAL REPORTS](http://www.inc.com/special-reports)
    -   [TREP LIFE](http://www.inc.com/treplife)
    -   [PRODUCTIVITY
        PLAYBOOK](http://www.inc.com/productivity-playbook)
    -   [35th ANNIVERSARY](http://www.inc.com/inc-35)
    -   [DATA DETECTIVES](http://www.inc.com/data-detectives)
    -   [FOUNDERS FORUM](http://www.inc.com/founders-forum)

-   [WOMEN'S SUMMIT](http://women.inc.com/?cid=so03007)
-   [Inc. 5000 Conference](http://conference.inc.com/?cid=so03007)

-   [Magazine](http://www.inc.com/magazine)
-   [Newsletters](http://www.inc.com/newsletter)
-   [Events](http://www.inc.com/events)
-   [Advertise](http://mediakit.inc.com)
-   [Subscribe](http://www.inc.com/magsub)

[](http://www.inc.com/)

Login or signup

36

![image](http://images.inc.com/ajaxloader/back-to-top.png?asdf)

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6916907&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cj=1)

![image](http://grunerandjahr.112.2o7.net/b/ss/gjinccomprod/1/H.24.1--NS/0)

[GROW](http://www.inc.com/grow)

7 Ways to Promote Yourself When You're Introverted

BY [Paul Jarvis](http://www.inc.com/author/paul-jarvis)
[@pjrvs](http://www.twitter.com/pjrvs)

Marketing doesn't have to be you doing everything.

Advertisement

You have something to say.

You've been saving it up for a while now, being patient, listening,
taking notes, and researching.

You want your voice to be heard, but you're scared to open your mouth.

Reading about self-promotion and marketing is interesting, but it
totally doesn't jibe with what you think will work for you or how you
think you should share your work.

Sharing, talking, and putting yourself out there take a lot of energy,
and most of the time you'd rather just focus on your work. Plus, you're
a private person, so sharing isn't something you're typically
comfortable doing.

*So, how do introverts market their work?*

**My story**

A lot of people assume I'm an extrovert because I'm not shy. I associate
more with introversion because I am energized by being alone--in both my
work and free time.

If left to my own devices, I'd rather be alone--most of the time, in the
woods with my thoughts (and probably a camera). I'm quiet around people,
but not because I'm awkward. It's because unless someone else engages
me, I'm happy being with my own thoughts. Once engaged or interested, I
have no problem talking to people--even folks I don't know. I like being
alone; whereas a shy person may wish he or she was better with social
interactions.

Introversion may be all the rage, thanks to smart folks like [Susan
Cain](https://www.amazon.com/Quiet-Power-Introverts-World-Talking-ebook/dp/B004J4WNL2/ref=as_sl_pc_ss_til?tag=eikfree-20&linkCode=w01&linkId=AOMI7NINMEF6DORZ&creativeASIN=B004J4WNL2).
And, like a true hipster, I was an introvert before it was cool. Back in
grade school, I'd hang out alone with Legos and the illustrating books
that I would write. However popular now, Cain's book is still worth
diving into, because a lot of the knowledge out there on marketing and
self-promotion is not geared toward us.

I do lots of self-promotion for my work, and I go even further, because
I write about it, too. Because I have a penchant for aloneness and
quiet, here's how I approach marketing and the self-promo necessary for
my work:

**1. Scheduling bravery**

Sharing can be draining. So I schedule sharing when I've got the energy
and am feeling amped up to do it. That means putting newsletters in the
cue sometimes weeks before they go out, prepublishing blog posts to go
live at later dates, and even scheduling tweets way ahead of time. (I
try to schedule the tweeting of articles I've written to go out at least
once a day.) Luckily, social media (and tools like Buffer, MailChimp,
and WordPress) make it easy to cue up as many things as you want for
posting at a future date.

**2. Not everything needs to be an open discussion**

I'm picky about receiving feedback on my writing. Not because I think I
know everything, but because I don't have the mental space to deal with
a constant discussion of my ideas. That's why I don't have comments on
my website and why I don't answer every tweet, or even have a Facebook
account. Interactions require a specific headspace that I'm not always
in, so I pick and choose which places I interact. For me, that means I
always interact with my newsletter (because I enjoy that the most) and
sometimes on Twitter (my social network of choice). You can pick and
choose interacting with others, or turn off interactions if they don't
suit you.

**3. Focus on your audience**

I talk about this a lot, but I focus my attention solely on my [rat
people](http://pjrvs.com/a/rats). If some people are not into your work,
hate what you do, or wouldn't ever think about supporting you, it's OK
to write those people off. Don't answer their emails, don't reply to
them on social media--pretend they don't exist. Difficult to do? Yes.
Important to do in the long run? Totally.

**4. Share what makes you strong**

There's a lot of talk about authenticity, vulnerability, and
honesty--and while those are good, seldom does advice out there paint
the whole picture. You can share the honest and vulnerable parts of you
that you want, and keep the rest to yourself. You don't have to share
everything; you can just share what you're comfortable with or what
gives you strength. If you're naturally private, then only share small
pieces. If you're not comfortable sharing with strangers, just share
tiny amounts publicly and share more privately with them (say, if they
opt into your list or join a private Facebook community).

**5. Recharge**

The most important thing about self-promotion or marketing is that you
don't have to always be doing it. Do it at the end of your day; schedule
it; do it once or twice a week. Then retreat to doing your work or
recharging. I know how to reenergize myself (nature, reading books,
watching sci-fi). Figuring how you get energy is important when you know
which things in life drain it.

**6. Find your medium**

I know I'm not the best public speaker. I don't like big groups (like
events or conferences), and I'm better at communicating through the
written word. This isn't negative self-talk--I don't even feel bad about
it--I just play to my strengths and only occasionally push the
boundaries of my weaknesses. Whether it's writing, video, audio,
painting, dance, whatever--find the medium you're most comfortable with
and do most of your sharing in that way. And then sometimes, push
against the mediums you don't think you're as good at, in order to grow.

**7. Practice your story**

A lot of the time, introverts aren't the best at talking about
themselves or their work. I actually practice, by writing and rewriting
my bio. Writing and rewriting book synopses. Sometimes, if I'm pitching
a design to a client, I'll pre-write out all the points and benefits I
want to mention when talking to the client. Practice before taking
something public. For books or products, I also enlist help from other
people (who are part of the audience it's created for) and get them to
describe back to me whatever it is I'll be selling. That helps me with
language and phrasing.

--

I definitely know that introversion isn't a one-size-fits-all label (and
anyway, labels are for jars, not people), but the above points are what
works for me. I hope one or more might help you if lean that way, too.

Remember the "self" in self-promotion is you, and guess what? You are in
charge of you! Introvert or not, you make the calls on what fits and
what doesn't. So do things in the unique way that works for you.

***Marketing doesn't have to be you doing everything.***

It can be a focus on one type of interaction, one social network, and
one schedule that works for your on- and off-times.

As long as you're sharing your work with other people--the right
people--then you're marketing. Because really, all marketing is is
communication. And even introverts know how to do that, even if it's in
small doses.

IMAGE: BrianRBielawa / Flickr

Last updated: Sep 3, 2014

\

More:

[How to Choose the Perfect Name for Your
Company](http://www.inc.com/mayra-jimenez/choosing-a-great-name-for-your-company.html?cid=readmore)

[10 Tips to Help You Become a Superstar in
Sales](http://www.inc.com/rhett-power/10-tips-to-help-you-become-a-superstar-in-sales.html?cid=readmore)

[5 Must-Have Spaces for Your
Office](http://www.inc.com/denise-cherry/5-must-have-spaces-for-your-office.html?cid=readmore)

[The Easy Secret to Making Yourself Better at
Anything](http://www.inc.com/the-muse/the-easy-secret-to-making-yourself-better-at-anything.html?cid=readmore)

[7 Great Pieces of Career Advice No One Ever Told
You](http://www.inc.com/jessica-stillman/7-great-pieces-of-career-advice-no-one-ever-told-you.html?cid=readmore)

[![image](http://www.inc.com/uploaded_files/image/100x100/Paul-Jarvis_38925.jpg)](http://www.inc.com/author/paul-jarvis)

[@pjrvs](http://www.twitter.com/pjrvs)

[PAUL JARVIS](http://www.inc.com/author/paul-jarvis)

[Paul Jarvis](http://pjrvs.com/signup) is a best-selling author,
designer, and gentleman of adventure. He’s worked with Silicon Valley
startups, pro sports athletes, Fortune 500 companies, best-selling
authors, and the world’s biggest entrepreneurs. He also writes for his
popular newsletter, [The Sunday Dispatches.](http://pjrvs.com/signup)

\

[PRINT THIS ARTICLE](javascript:window.print();)

\

\

Register on Inc.com today to get full access to:\
 All articles | Magazine archives | Livestream events | Comments

EMAIL

PASSWORD

![image](http://images.inc.com/login/right-menu/go-forward.png)

[Forgot Password?](#)

EMAIL

![image](http://images.inc.com/login/right-menu/go-forward.png)

New Member?\
Sign Up Now

FIRST NAME

LAST NAME

EMAIL

PASSWORD

![image](http://images.inc.com/login/right-menu/go-forward.png)

Sign in\
if you're already registered

\

Or sign up using:

\

[![image](http://inc.com/images/spacer.gif)](http://www.inc.com/lib/facebook/fb_login.php)

[](http://www.inc.com/lib/linkedin/startlogin.php?returl=http://www.inc.com/)

![image](http://ads.undertone.com/fc.php?script=profileTargetingCommon:logBeacon&cb=[timestamp]&pid=694)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.inc.com/paul-jarvis/7-ways-to-promote-yourself-when-you-re-introverted.html?cid=sf01001
