-   [PBS NEWSHOUR](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/)
-   [** WATCH](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/videos/)
-   [politics](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/politics/)
    **
    -   [Shields and
        Brooks](/newshour/tag/shields-and-brooks/ "Shields and Brooks")
    -   [Supreme Court](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/supreme-court/)

[arts](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/arts/)

**

-   [Art Beat](/newshour/art/)
-   [Poetry](/newshour/poetry)
    -   [Where Poetry
        Lives](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/where-poetry-lives/)

[nation](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/nation/)

**

-   [Supreme Court](/newshour/tag/supreme-court/)

[world](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/world/)

**

-   [Social
    Entrepreneurship](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/social-entrepreneurship/)

[economy](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/economy/)

**

-   [Making Sen$e](/newshour/making-sense/)
-   [Social Security](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/author/lkotlikoff/)
-   [Ask the
    Headhunter](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/ask-the-headhunter/)
-   [Paul Solman](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/author/psolman/)

[science](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/science/)

**

-   [Science
    Wednesday](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/science-wednesday/)
-   [Miles O’Brien](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/author/mobrien/)

[health](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/health/)

[education](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/education/)

**

-   [Teachers](/newshour/extra/)

[teachers](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/extra/)

[The Rundown](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/)

[TV SCHEDULE](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tv-schedule/)

[ABOUT US](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/about/)

[FEEDBACK](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/about/contact-us/)

[SUBSCRIPTIONS](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/subscriptions/)

[PRIVACY](http://www.pbs.org/about/policies/privacy-policy/)

[JOB OPENINGS](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/jobs/)

-   [RECENT PROGRAMS](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/videos/)
-   [POLITICS](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/politics/)
-   [ARTS](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/arts/)
-   [NATION](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/nation/)
-   [WORLD](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/world/)
-   [ECONOMY](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/economy/)
-   [SCIENCE](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/science/)
-   [HEALTH](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/health/)
-   [EDUCATION](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/education/)
-   [TEACHERS](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/extra/)
-   [THE RUNDOWN](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/)

[**](#)

[![PBS
NEWSHOUR](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/newshour-logo-hires.png)](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/)

-   SUBSCRIBE
-   [**](#)
-   FOLLOW US
-   [**](# "Facebook")
-   [**](# "Twitter")
-   [**](# "Google +")
-   [**](# "Youtube")

[![MAKING
SEN$E](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/making-sense-header.png)](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/)

What’s the State of Economic Inequality in America?
===================================================

-   **
-   **
-   ** +1
-   **
-   ** EMAIL
-   

BY Paul Solman *December 27, 2013 at 5:10 PM EDT*

*With emergency benefits for the long-term unemployed expiring Saturday,
what does economic inequality look like in America and how is it tied to
unemployment and mobility? The NewsHour explores that topic with
**[former labor secretary Robert Reich and the Manhattan Institute’s
Scott Winship on
Friday](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-inequality_12-27/)**.
Economics correspondent Paul Solman has filed a series of ongoing
reports on inequality, which you can watch above. And read more from our
recent inequality coverage below.*

Emergency unemployment benefits expire Saturday, cutting off assistance
to 1.3 million long-term unemployed workers.

Yes, last month’s jobs report was largely positive — the economy added
200,000 jobs and the unemployment rate dropped to 7 percent. But,
according to Bureau of Labor Statistics data, there are **[2.9
unemployed people for every job
opening](http://www.epi.org/press/ratio-job-seekers-job-openings-holds-steady/)**.
And for months now, 4 million people have been out of work for 26 weeks
and longer.

So how is unemployment assistance going to change come Saturday? Since
1935, when unemployment insurance began, states and the federal
government have funded *up to* 26 weeks of unemployment (with the amount
coming from the feds depending on the state). But in 2008, Congress
expanded the federal government’s authority to administer “extended
benefits” (after states ran out of money), and it’s this **[emergency
funding](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/12/20/unemployment-benefits-for-1-3-million-workers-expire-next-week-heres-what-you-should-know/)**
that the Congress has declined to renew this year. (Senate Democrats say
they’ll raise the issue as soon as they return from recess.)

Effectively, this means that those states that have offered benefits for
anywhere from under 26 to 73 weeks will now be limited to offering 26
weeks or less. (See what that looks like in these **[helpful
maps](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/govbeat/wp/2013/12/26/where-the-1-3-million-people-losing-unemployment-aid-this-week-live/)**
from the Washington Post.)

At the very least, a temporary suspension of emergency unemployment
assistance will delay benefit checks for these 1.3 million Americans,
reducing their purchasing power — not to mention their standard of
living. As Northeastern University economist Barry Bluestone points out
below, when poorer people can’t spend money, the economy wallows and
unemployment *for everyone* remains higher.

575025676256762Jobs report doesn't improve outlook for long-term
joblessThe November jobs report boasted positive momentum, including
gains in manufacturing and construction sectors. But economics
correspondent Paul Solman reports that a high level of long-term
unemployment continues to be a stubborn sour note for the American
economy, with a political fight looming over unemployment
benefits.2013-12-06 18:14:00disabledtrue

\
 In light of the economic hit 1.3 million Americas are about to bear,
we’re examining the state of economic inequality in America on Friday’s
NewsHour. Is it a big deal? And to what extent is it related to
unemployment and mobility in this country?

Like Bluestone, former Labor Secretary **[Robert
Reich](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/10/why-robert-reich-cares-so-passionately-about-economic-inequality.html)**,
who will appear on the NewsHour Friday, argues that inequality is a
problem for everyone — not just those Americans who haven’t found a job
in 27 weeks. It’s “Inequality for All” — the title of the recent feature
film in which he stars. Watch his conversation with Paul Solman about
the moral and economic case against inequality.

An unequal society, in which income wealth is concentrated at the top,
cannot sustain an economy whose main driver is consumer spending, Reich
and Bluestone agree.

But doesn’t that inequality have its purposes? Does it not spur those in
society’s lower rungs to try to move up? That is, in part, the
Republican argument against extending unemployment benefits: benefits
disincentivize the poor from accepting the jobs that are available to
them — or from working at all.

In 2011, libertarian law professor Richard Epstein of New York
University School of Law explained how economic inequality drives
innovation and motivates upward mobility.

But does that American dream — the idea that those with less can move up
— still have a place in today’s reality?

Persistent income inequality is actually **[dampening upward
mobility](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/07/rock-and-roll-economics-and-rebuilding-the-middle-class.html)**,
the outgoing head of President Barack Obama’s Council of Economic
Advisers Alan Krueger argued back in July. He introduced “The Great
Gatsby Curve” to show that as equality increases across society,
mobility across generations decreases.

![image](http://newshour.s3.amazonaws.com:80/photos/2013/07/11/Great_Gatsby_Curve_business_desk.jpg "Great Gatsby Curve")*Graph
presented in Alan Krueger’s June 2013 speech at the Rock and Roll Hall
of Fame: “Land of Hope and Dreams: Rock and Roll, Economics and
Rebuilding the Middle Class.” Graph sources: Miles Corak (2011), OECD,
CEA estimates.*

But who’s to say that’s a causal relationship? As Harvard’s Greg Mankiw
argued on this page, **[family dynamics as well as inherited
characteristics](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/07/defending-the-one-percent-1.html)**,
like IQ and talent, underlie a lot of the intergenerational transmission
of economic status.

Those innate and family-based differences are important, but what the
curve tells us, University of Ottawa’s **[Miles
Corak](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/07/the-great-gatsby-curve-inequality-and-the-end-of-upward-mobility.html)**
concluded in the final installment of this summer’s three-part
inequality series, is that “inequality heightens the income
consequences” of those differences.

The relationship between where Americans live and their chances for
mobility earned a fair amount of buzz in 2013 with the release of a new
study concluding that some parts of America are lands of opportunity,
while others remain — or have reverted to — lands of persistent
inequality. NewsHour’s Jeff Brown spoke with one of the study’s authors,
Harvard’s Raj Chetty, below.

For much more about economic inequality, watch the NewsHour’s discussion
Friday, Paul Solman’s series of reports above, and, as always, stay
tuned to the Making Sense page.

* * * * *

*This entry is cross-posted on the
[**Rundown**](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/) — NewsHour’s blog of
news and insight.*

[Follow @paulsolman](https://twitter.com/paulsolman)

// !function(d,s,id){var
js,fjs=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0];if(!d.getElementById(id)){js=d.createElement(s);js.id=id;js.src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js";fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js,fjs);}}(document,"script","twitter-wjs");
// ]]&gt;</script\><span id="more-58457"\></span\></p\></div\><!--
.entry-content --\><div class="addthis\_toolbox post-share-bar cf"\> <a
href="\#" class="addthis\_button\_facebook facebook" title="Share on
Facebook"\><span\><i class="fa fa-facebook"\></i\> SHARE ON
FACEBOOK</span\></a\> <a href="\#" class="addthis\_button\_twitter
twitter" title="Share on Twitter"\><span\><i class="fa
fa-twitter"\></i\> SHARE ON TWITTER</span\></a\></div\><div
class="post-tags"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/making-sense/" rel="tag"\>Making
Sen$e</a\></div\><div class="blog-post-nav cf"\><div class="nav-previous
nav-item"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/so-you-think-you-can-do-better/"
rel="prev"\><i class="fa fa-angle-double-left"\></i\><div
class="nav-float"\><div class="nav-label"\><i class="fa
fa-angle-double-left mobile-only"\></i\> PREVIOUS POST</div\><div
class="nav-title"\>So You Think You Can Do Better Than the
Fed?</div\></div\></a\></div\><div class="nav-next nav-item"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/is-social-security-contributin/"
rel="next"\><div class="nav-float"\><div class="nav-label"\>NEXT POST <i
class="fa fa-angle-double-right mobile-only"\></i\></div\><div
class="nav-title"\>Is Social Security Contributing to the
Deficit?</div\></div\> <i class="fa
fa-angle-double-right"\></i\></a\></div\></div\><div id='commentpolicy'
class='nocontent'\> <a href='\#' class='policy-toggle'\>Are you aware of
our comment policy?</a\><div class='commentpolicy-open'\>Beginning
October 24, 2012, PBS NewsHour will allow open commenting for all
registered users. We hope that the elimination of our moderation process
will enable a more organic discussion amongst you, our audience.
However, if a commenter violates our terms of use or abuses the
commenting forum, their comment will be removed. We reserve the right to
remove posts that do not follow these basic guidelines: comments must be
relevant to the topic of the post; may not include profanity, personal
attacks or hate speech; may not promote a business or raise money; may
not be spam. Anything you post should be your own work. The PBS NewsHour
reserves the right to read on the air and/or publish on its website or
in any medium now known or unknown the comments or emails that we
receive. By submitting comments, you agree to the PBS <a
href='http://www.pbs.org/about/policies/terms-of-use/'
target='\_blank'\>Terms of Use</a\> and <a
href='http://www.pbs.org/about/policies/privacy-policy/'
target='\_blank'\>Privacy Policy</a\>, which include more
details.</div\></div\><div id='disqus\_thread'\></div\><script
type='text/javascript'\>var disqus\_shortname = 'business-desk'; var
disqus\_url =
'http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/12/whats-the-state-of-economic-inequality-in-america.html';
var disqus\_identifier = '58457
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/12/whats-the-state-of-economic-inequality-in-america.html';
(function() { var dsq = document.createElement('script'); dsq.type =
'text/javascript'; dsq.async = true; dsq.src = '//' + disqus\_shortname
+ '.disqus.com/embed.js'; (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] ||
document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0]).appendChild(dsq); })();
</script\><noscript\>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a
href='http://disqus.com/?ref\_noscript'\>comments powered by
Disqus.</a\></noscript\></div\><!-- .post-wrap-inner --\></div\><!--
\#post --\> </article\><div id='readthisnext' class='nhlinkbox'\><div
class='nhlinkbox-head'\>READ THIS NEXT <span class='close'\><i class='fa
fa-times'\></i\></span\></div\><div class='nhlinkbox-links'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/alarming-decline-wild-moose-new-hampshire/'\>Researchers
track New Hampshire moose in hopes of pinpointing cause of population
decline</a\></div\></div\></div\> <!-- .page-content --\></div\> <!--
.left-column --\><div class="right-column"\><div id="sidebar"\><div
class="sidebar-social cf"\><ul class="cf addthis\_toolbox"\><li
class="label"\><div class="label-pad"\>SUBSCRIBE</div\></li\><li
class="email r-button"\><a href="\#" class="round togglesubscribe"\><i
class="fa fa-envelope-o"\></i\></a\></li\><li class="label"\><div
class="label-pad"\>FOLLOW US</div\></li\><li class="facebook
r-button"\><a href="\#" target="\_blank" class="round
addthis\_button\_facebook\_follow" title="Facebook"
addthis:userid="newshour"\><i class="fa
fa-facebook"\></i\></a\></li\><li class="twitter r-button"\><a href="\#"
target="\_blank" class="round addthis\_button\_twitter\_follow"
title="Twitter" addthis:userid="NewsHour"\><i class="fa
fa-twitter"\></i\></a\></li\><li class="google r-button"\><a href="\#"
target="\_blank" class="round addthis\_button\_google\_follow"
title="Google +" addthis:userid="+PBSNewsHour"\><i class="fa
fa-google-plus"\></i\></a\></li\><li class="youtube r-button"\><a
href="\#" target="\_blank" class="addthis\_button\_youtube\_follow"
title="Youtube" addthis:userid="PBSNewsHour"\><i class="fa
fa-youtube"\></i\></a\></li\></ul\></div\><div id="desktopad"
class="no-mobile"\><div class="sidebar-advertisement graybg"\><div
class="tiny"\>SUPPORT FOR PBS NEWSHOUR PROVIDED BY</div\><div
class="ad-wrap"\><div class="ad maxwidth"\><a
href="http://www.sloan.org/" target="\_blank"\><img
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/sloan-ad.jpg"
width="298" height="249" alt=""/\></a\></div\></div\></div\></div\><div
class="sidebar-newsletter nobg newsletter-business-desk padded outline
cf"\><div class="maxwidth"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/"\>MAKING
SEN$E</a\></div\><div class="blog-welcome cf"\><div class='photo
maxwidth'\><a href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/author/psolman/'\><img
width="80" height="80"
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/paul-solman-hat-80x80.jpg"
class="attachment-80x80 wp-post-image" alt="Paul Solman" title="Paul
Solman" /\></a\></div\><div class="bloq-welcome-text"\>Correspondent
Paul Solman covers all things business and economics in these online
exclusive reports. <a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/author/psolman/"\>Bio <i class="fa
fa-angle-double-right"\></i\></a\></div\></div\><h5\>SUBSCRIBE</h5\><div
class="tease2"\>Receive MAKING SEN$E news blog in your inbox.</div\><div
class="sidebar-newsletter-form cf"\><form class="subscribe-mailchimp"\>
<input type="email" name="MERGE0" id="MERGE0" class="email"
placeholder="Email Address" required/\> <input type="hidden" name="id"
id="id" class="mc-hidden" value=""/\> <button\>SUBSCRIBE</button\><div
class="form-message"\></div\></form\></div\><div class="feeds"\>PODCAST:
<a
href="http://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/making-sen$e-pbs-newshour/id503548853"
target="\_blank"\>ITUNES</a\> | <a
href="http://feeds.feedburner.com/NewsHourMakingSensePodcast"
target="\_blank"\>XML</a\> <span class="feeds-right"\>HEADLINE FEEDS: <a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/feed/"
target="\_blank"\>XML</a\></span\></div\></div\><div
class="sidebar-broadcast-reports"\><div class="sidebar-broadcast-wrap
cf"\><div class="title"\>BROADCAST REPORTS</div\><div
class='reports-sidebar'\><div class='reports-sidebar-viewport'\><div
style='width:10000px'\><div class='reports-sidebar-item'\><div
class='player maxwidth'\><div class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-jobs\_08-02/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/08/02/jobs\_video\_covestack.jpg'
alt='' width='300' height='169' onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-jobs\_08-02/'\><div
class='play-overlay'\><i class='fa
fa-play'\></i\></div\></a\></div\><div class='player-title bold'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-jobs\_08-02/'\>July
Report Shows Jobs Added but Economic Recovery May Be Slowing
Down</a\></div\></div\><div class='reports-sidebar-item'\><div
class='player maxwidth'\><div class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-youth\_07-29/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/07/29/20130729\_youth\_video\_covestack.jpg'
alt='' width='300' height='169' onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-youth\_07-29/'\><div
class='play-overlay'\><i class='fa
fa-play'\></i\></div\></a\></div\><div class='player-title bold'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-youth\_07-29/'\>Teens
Lose Out on Important Summer Jobs as Older Workers Fill Their
Spots</a\></div\></div\><div class='reports-sidebar-item'\><div
class='player maxwidth'\><div class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-games\_07-11/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/07/11/games\_video\_covestack.jpg'
alt='' width='300' height='169' onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-games\_07-11/'\><div
class='play-overlay'\><i class='fa
fa-play'\></i\></div\></a\></div\><div class='player-title bold'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-games\_07-11/'\>How
Virtual Reality Games Can Impact Society, Encourage
Prosperity</a\></div\></div\><div class='reports-sidebar-item'\><div
class='player maxwidth'\><div class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-makingsense\_07-09/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/07/09/makingsense\_video\_covestack.jpeg'
alt='' width='300' height='169' onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-makingsense\_07-09/'\><div
class='play-overlay'\><i class='fa
fa-play'\></i\></div\></a\></div\><div class='player-title bold'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-makingsense\_07-09/'\>Artists
Learn Art of Business to Brave Tough Economic
Times</a\></div\></div\><div class='reports-sidebar-item'\><div
class='player maxwidth'\><div class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-makingsense\_07-05/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/07/05/makingsense\_1\_video\_covestack.jpg'
alt='' width='300' height='169' onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-makingsense\_07-05/'\><div
class='play-overlay'\><i class='fa
fa-play'\></i\></div\></a\></div\><div class='player-title bold'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec13-makingsense\_07-05/'\>Left
Behind by the Recovery, Inner City Teens Struggle to Find
Jobs</a\></div\></div\><div class='reports-sidebar-item'\><div
class='player maxwidth'\><div class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-jan-june13-artists\_06-27/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/06/27/makingsense\_video\_covestack.jpg'
alt='' width='300' height='169' onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-jan-june13-artists\_06-27/'\><div
class='play-overlay'\><i class='fa
fa-play'\></i\></div\></a\></div\><div class='player-title bold'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-jan-june13-artists\_06-27/'\>Performing
Artists Compete, Move, Adapt in Tough Economy</a\></div\></div\><div
class='reports-sidebar-item'\><div class='player maxwidth'\><div
class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-jan-june13-makingsense\_06-21/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/06/21/makingsense\_video\_covestack.jpg'
alt='' width='300' height='169' onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-jan-june13-makingsense\_06-21/'\><div
class='play-overlay'\><i class='fa
fa-play'\></i\></div\></a\></div\><div class='player-title bold'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-jan-june13-makingsense\_06-21/'\>Exploring
the Psychology of Wealth, &\#8216;Pernicious&\#8217; Effects of Economic
Inequality</a\></div\></div\></div\></div\><a
class='reports-sidebar-prev'\><i class='fa
fa-chevron-left'\></i\></a\><a class='reports-sidebar-next'\><i
class='fa fa-chevron-right'\></i\></a\></div\></div\></div\><div
class="sidebar-popular sidebar-left-inset cf"\><ul class="pop-nav
cf"\><li class="read"\><a href="\#" data-tab="popular1"
class="active"\>MOST READ</a\></li\><li class="discussed"\><a href="\#"
data-tab="popular2" \>MOST DISCUSSED</a\></li\></ul\><div id="popular1"
class="tab-content cf"\><ul class='sidebar-popular-list'\><li
class="cf"\><div class="count"\>1</div\><div class="link"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/images-world-war-devastation-overlaid-modern-photos-france/"\>Haunting
photos of World War I reveal how little Europe has changed in 100 years
</a\></div\></li\><li class="cf"\><div class="count"\>2</div\><div
class="link"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/gop-quietly-secures-change-health-care-law/"\>GOP
quietly secures change in health care law </a\></div\></li\><li
class="cf"\><div class="count"\>3</div\><div class="link"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/ask-headhunter-help-kid-get-job/"\>Ask
the Headhunter: Help this kid get a job </a\></div\></li\><li
class="cf"\><div class="count"\>4</div\><div class="link"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/hagel-first-foreigner-tour-chinas-new-aircraft-carrier/"\>Hagel
is first foreigner to tour China's new aircraft carrier
</a\></div\></li\><li class="cf"\><div class="count"\>5</div\><div
class="link"\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/will-guaranteed-income-ever-come-america/"\>Will
a guaranteed income ever come to America?
</a\></div\></li\></ul\></div\><div id="popular2" class="tab-content
cf"\><ul class="sidebar-popular-list"\><li class='cf'\><div
class='count'\>1</div\><div class='link'\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/americas-ponzi-scheme-why-social-security-needs-to-retire/"\>America's
Ponzi scheme: Why Social Security needs to retire </a\></div\></li\><li
class='cf'\><div class='count'\>2</div\><div class='link'\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/will-guaranteed-income-ever-come-america/"\>Will
a guaranteed income ever come to America?</a\></div\></li\><li
class='cf'\><div class='count'\>3</div\><div class='link'\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/part-timers-are-the-dark-side-of-the-bright-jobs-numbers/"\>Part-timers
are the dark side of the bright jobs numbers</a\></div\></li\><li
class='cf'\><div class='count'\>4</div\><div class='link'\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/homeless-professor-protests-conditions-adjuncts/"\>Homeless
professor protests conditions of adjuncts</a\></div\></li\><li
class='cf'\><div class='count'\>5</div\><div class='link'\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/08/getting-married-or-divorced-to-get-social-security-same-sex-or-straight.html"\>How
Marriage and Divorce Affect Your Social Security
Payments</a\></div\></li\></ul\></div\></div\><div
class='editors-picks-widget'\><div class='editors-picks-head'\>EDITOR'S
PICKS</div\><ul\><li class='cf'\><div class='photo maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/avoid-the-social-security-nightmare-that-doomed-this-couple/'\><img
width="210" height="119"
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/NYC-couple-210x119.jpg"
class="attachment-210x119 wp-post-image" alt="Social Security expert
Larry Kotlikoff&\#039;s fictitious horror story about a couple who was
misled about their benefit collection strategy is a cautionary tale.
Photo by Flickr user John Fraissinet" /\></a\></div\><div
class='txt-wrap'\><div class='title'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/avoid-the-social-security-nightmare-that-doomed-this-couple/'\>Avoid
the Social Security nightmare that doomed this
couple</a\></div\></div\></li\><li class='cf'\><div class='photo
maxwidth'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/sex-cells-the-gender-divided-m/'\><img
src='http://www-tc.pbs.org/prod-media/newshour/photos/2013/11/27/sperm\_donors\_video\_covestack.JPG'
alt='' width='210' height='119'
onerror='imgError(this)'\></a\></div\><div class='txt-wrap'\><div
class='title'\><a
href='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/sex-cells-the-gender-divided-m/'\>Sex
Cells: The Gender Divided Market for Eggs and
Sperm</a\></div\></div\></li\></ul\></div\><div class="sidebar-watch
sidebar-watch-alt sidebar-left-inset"\><div class="sidebar-watch-padding
cf"\><div class="sidebar-watch-logo maxwidth notouch"\><img
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/sidebar-episode-logo-hires.png"
alt="PBS NEWSHOUR"/\></div\><!-- ajax loaded. --\><div
id="displaywatchepisodealt" class="cf"\><img
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/ajax-loader-dark.gif"
width="16" height="16" class="side-loader" /\> Loading...</div\><div
class="sidebar-watch-buttons notouch cf"\> <a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/videos/"\><button
class="button1"\>WATCH<div class="button-small"\>FULL
BROADCASTS</div\></button\></a\> <a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/subscriptions/"\><button
class="button2"\>LISTEN<div class="button-small"\>FULL AUDIO
PODCASTS</div\></button\></a\></div\></div\><div class='bio-links
notouch maxwidth'\><img
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/sidebar-judy-gwen2.jpg'
width='360' height='316' alt='' class='bio-links-judy' usemap='\#bios'
border='0'/\></div\><map name='bios'\><area alt='ABOUT Judy Woodruff'
coords='16,152,166,210' href='/newshour/author/jwoodruff/'/\><area
alt='ABOUT Gwen Ifill' coords='234,201,340,256'
href='/newshour/author/gifill/'/\></map\></div\><div
class="sidebar-sponsors graybg sidebar-left-inset cf"\><div
class="tiny"\>SUPPORT FOR PBS NEWSHOUR PROVIDED BY</div\><ul\><li\><a
href="http://www.baesystems.com/home" target="\_blank"\><img
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/sponsor-bae.png"
alt="BAE SYSTEMS"/\></a\></li\><li\><a href="http://www.bnsf.com/"
target="\_blank"\><img
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/sponsor-bnsf.png"
alt="BNSF RAILWAY"/\></a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.schwab.com/public/schwab/investing/accounts\_products/portfolio\_solutions/accountability\_guarantee?bmac=qwk"
target="\_blank"\><img
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/sponsor-charles-schwab.png"
alt="Charles Schwab"/\></a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/cgi-registry/sitemembershiplink.cgir"
target="\_blank"\><img
src="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/images/sponsor-viewers.png"
alt="VIEWERS LIKE YOU"/\></a\></li\></ul\></div\></div\><!-- \#sidebar
--\></div\></div\><!-- \#pagewrap --\></div\><!-- \#main --\></div\><!--
\#page --\></div\><!-- \#wrapper --\><div id="footer"
class="nocontent"\><div class="contentwidth site-footer cf"\><div
class="footer-left no-mobile"\><div
class="footer-list-title"\>TOPICS</div\><ul class="footer-list"\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/videos/"\>RECENT
PROGRAMS</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/politics/"\>POLITICS</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/arts/"\>ARTS</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/nation/"\>NATION</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/world/"\>WORLD</a\></li\></ul\><ul
class="footer-list"\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/economy/"\>ECONOMY</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/science/"\>SCIENCE</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/health/"\>HEALTH</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/topic/education/"\>EDUCATION</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/extra/"\>TEACHERS</a\></li\></ul\><ul
class="footer-list"\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/tv-schedule/"\>TV
LISTINGS</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/about/"\>ABOUT US</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/about/contact-us/"\>FEEDBACK</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/subscriptions/"\>SUBSCRIPTIONS</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/about/policies/privacy-policy/"\>PRIVACY</a\></li\><li\><a
href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/jobs/"\>JOB
OPENINGS</a\></li\></ul\></div\><!-- .footer-left --\><div
class="footer-right"\><p\>&copy; 1996 - 2014 MacNeil / Lehrer
Productions.<br/\>All Rights Reserved.</p\><p\>Support the kind of
journalism done by the NewsHour... <a
href="http://www.pbs.org/cgi-registry/sitemembershiplink.cgir"\>Become a
member of your local PBS station</a\>.</p\></div\><!-- .footer-right
--\></div\></div\><!-- \#footer --\></div\> <!-- \#snapwrap --\><div
class="hidden"\><script src="http://stats.wordpress.com/e-201415.js"
type="text/javascript"\></script\><script type="text/javascript"\>
st\_go({v:'ext',j:'1:2.3.5',blog:'62247606',post:'58457',tz:'-4'}); var
load\_cmc = function(){linktracker\_init(62247606,58457,2);}; if (
typeof addLoadEvent != 'undefined' ) addLoadEvent(load\_cmc); else
load\_cmc(); </script\></div\><script type='text/javascript'\> var
disqus\_shortname = 'business-desk'; (function () { var s =
document.createElement('script'); s.async = true; s.type =
'text/javascript'; s.src = 'http://' + disqus\_shortname +
'.disqus.com/count.js'; (document.getElementsByTagName('HEAD')[0] ||
document.getElementsByTagName('BODY')[0]).appendChild(s); }());
</script\><!-- add this --\><script type="text/javascript"\> var
addthis\_share = { passthrough: { twitter: {via: 'NewsHour'}},
url\_transforms : {shorten: {twitter: 'bitly'}}, shorteners : {bitly :
{}} } var addthis\_config = {"data\_track\_addressbar":false,
"data\_track\_clickback":true, data\_ga\_property: 'UA-4005067-1',
data\_ga\_social : true}; </script\><script type="text/javascript"
src="//s7.addthis.com/js/300/addthis\_widget.js\#pubid=newshour"\></script\><!--
end add this --\><!-- NEWSHOUR URLS LEGACY VS NEW GUID:
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/12/whats-the-state-of-economic-inequality-in-america.html
PERMALINK:
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/whats-the-state-of-economic-inequality-in-america/
--\><script type="text/javascript"\> var \_sf\_async\_config = { uid:
7166, domain: 'pbs.org', useCanonical: true }; (function() { function
loadChartbeat() { window.\_sf\_endpt = (new Date()).getTime(); var e =
document.createElement('script'); e.setAttribute('language',
'javascript'); e.setAttribute('type', 'text/javascript');
e.setAttribute('src','//static.chartbeat.com/js/chartbeat.js');
document.body.appendChild(e); }; var oldonload = window.onload;
window.onload = (typeof window.onload != 'function') ? loadChartbeat :
function() { oldonload(); loadChartbeat(); }; })(); </script\> <!--
Calling auto localization code because we haven't yet. --\> <script
type="application/javascript"
src="http://www.pbs.org/cgi-registry/preferences/localize/ip2station-js.cgir?auto\_local\_unset"\></script\>
<!-- No Ad Zone defined for this page. --\> <script
type="text/javascript"\> var GA\_env = { ua\_list:
"UA-4005067-1,UA-1996666-1,UA-3963791-1,UA-4133641-1,ET-4133641-2" };
GA\_env.vars = { localized: 0 }; var GA\_jshost = (("https:" ==
document.location.protocol) ? "https://ssl." : "http://www.");
document.write(unescape("%3Cscript src='" + GA\_jshost +
"google-analytics.com/ga.js' type='text/javascript'%3E%3C/script%3E"));
</script\> <script src="/js/ga-current.js"
type="text/javascript"\></script\> <!-- Google Tag Manager --\> <script
type="text/javascript"\> GTMDataLayer = []; </script\>
<noscript\><iframe
src="//www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TWTDGH" height="0"
width="0" style="display:none;visibility:hidden"\></iframe\></noscript\>
<script\>(function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start':new
Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var
f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0],j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src='//www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f);})(window,document,'script','GTMDataLayer','GTM-TWTDGH');</script\>
<!-- End Google Tag Manager --\> <!-- Begin comScore Tag --\> <script\>
var \_comscore = \_comscore || []; \_comscore.push({ c1: "2", c2:
"3005420" }); (function() { var s = document.createElement("script"), el
= document.getElementsByTagName("script")[0]; s.async = true; s.src =
(document.location.protocol == "https:" ? "https://sb" : "http://b") +
".scorecardresearch.com/beacon.js"; el.parentNode.insertBefore(s, el);
})(); </script\> <noscript\> <img
src="http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005420&cv=2.0&cj=1" /\>
</noscript\> <!-- End comScore Tag --\> <style\>layer { position:
absolute; }</style\> <script type='text/javascript'
language='JavaScript'
src='/includes/javascript/elqNow/elqCfg.js'\></script\> <script
type='text/javascript' language='JavaScript'
src='/includes/javascript/elqNow/elqImg.js'\></script\> <script\>var
PBS\_CHROME\_CONFIG = {'api\_key':
'd59a8dbf-1f1c-43aa-9e1a-deaad0ff679f'};</script\><script
type="text/javascript"
src="http://gchrome.cdn.pbs.org/media/js/gc.js"\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-includes/js/jquery/ui/jquery.ui.core.min.js?ver=1.10.3'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-includes/js/jquery/ui/jquery.ui.datepicker.min.js?ver=1.10.3'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/lib/snap.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/lib/jquery.touchslider.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/app/fontline-pap-core.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/lib/jquery.rwdImageMaps.min.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/lib/fluidvids.js?ver=1.1'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/lib/fixto.min.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/app/newshour020314.js?ver=1.7'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/lib/jquery.ba-bbq.min.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/app/newshour-hp-feed2.js?ver=1.8'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/app/newshour-header.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/themes/newshour/libs/js/app/newshour-mobile.js?ver=1.0'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://www.pbs.org/newshour/wp-content/plugins/cove-asset-manager/assets/js/jquery.cove-videoplayer-1.1.js?ver=1.2'\></script\><script
type='text/javascript'
src='http://s0.wp.com/wp-content/js/devicepx-jetpack.js?ver=201415'\></script\></body\></html\><!--
Performance optimized by W3 Total Cache. Learn more:
http://www.w3-edge.com/wordpress-plugins/ Minified using apc Page
Caching using apc Database Caching 32/60 queries in 0.067 seconds using
apc Object Caching 1672/1709 objects using apc Content Delivery Network
via newshour-tc.pbs.org Served at 2014-04-08 16:51:09 by W3 Total Cache
--\>

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/whats-the-state-of-economic-inequality-in-america/
