For a better browsing experience, please upgrade your browser.

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=728x90,924x50,1x1;)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=728x90,924x50,1x1;)

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=320x50,1x1;)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=320x50,1x1;)

[FiveThirtyEight](http://fivethirtyeight.com)
=============================================

[Economics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/economics/)
--------------------------------------------------

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=200x24,1x1;)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=200x24,1x1;)

Search ** Search

-   [](http://twitter.com/FiveThirtyEight)
-   [](http://www.facebook.com/FiveThirtyEight)
-   [](http://espn.com)

-   [Menu](http://fivethirtyeight.com)
    -   [Home](http://fivethirtyeight.com/)
    -   [DataLab](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/)
    -   [Features](/features/)
    -   [Interactives](/interactives/)
    -   [Nate
        Silver](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/nate-silver/)
    -   [Contributors](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/)
    -   [Contact](/contact/)

-   [Politics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/politics/)
    -   [![A young girl waits for a freight train to depart in Ixtepec,
        Mexico, in July on her way to the U.S.
        border.](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/ap608539544471lede.jpg?w=300&h=225&crop=1)](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-american-opinion-is-split-on-the-child-migrant-crisis/)

        ### [Why American Opinion Is Split On The Child Migrant Crisis](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-american-opinion-is-split-on-the-child-migrant-crisis/)

    -   #### [The Political Conversation Isn’t About Terrorism Anymore](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-political-conversation-isnt-about-terrorism-anymore/)

    -   #### [Republicans Remain Slightly Favored To Take Control Of The Senate](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/republican-gop-senate-forecast/)

    -   [All Politics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/politics/)

-   [Economics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/economics/)
    -   [![One vacant shop and another shutting down in Los Angeles in
        2009.](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/was23500271.jpg?w=300&h=225&crop=1)](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-hasnt-been-disrupted/)

        ### [Corporate America Hasn’t Been Disrupted](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-hasnt-been-disrupted/)

    -   #### [It’s Too Soon to Celebrate the Drop in Long-Term Unemployment](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/its-too-soon-to-celebrate-the-drop-in-long-term-unemployment/)

    -   #### [Even After 25 Years, Pete Rose’s Ban From Baseball Is Money in the Bank](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/even-after-25-years-pete-roses-ban-from-baseball-is-money-in-the-bank/)

    -   [All Economics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/economics/)

-   [Science](http://fivethirtyeight.com/science/)
    -   [![In March, beachgoers walk past a sand sculpture made by
        Indian sand artist Sudersan Pattnaik with a message of prayers
        for the missing Malaysian Airlines flight MH370, which vanished
        from radar early on March
        8.](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/478140055.jpg?w=300&h=225&crop=1)](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/when-a-flight-vanishes-from-the-sky-amateur-trackers-know-it-instantly/)

        ### [When A Flight Vanishes From The Sky, Amateur Trackers Know It Instantly](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/when-a-flight-vanishes-from-the-sky-amateur-trackers-know-it-instantly/)

    -   #### [The Odds Of Winning The Indianapolis Colts’ Weather Challenge](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-odds-of-winning-the-indianapolis-colts-weather-challenge/)

    -   #### [In Science, It Matters That Women Come Last](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/in-science-it-matters-that-women-come-last/)

    -   [All Science](http://fivethirtyeight.com/science/)

-   [Life](http://fivethirtyeight.com/life/)
    -   [![Nigel Richards (right) with Chris Cree, co-president of North
        American Scrabble Players Association, after Richards won the
        2012 national
        championship.](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/ap103023753935.jpg?w=300&h=225&crop=1)](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-makes-nigel-richards-the-best-scrabble-player-on-earth/)

        ### [What Makes Nigel Richards The Best Scrabble Player On Earth](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-makes-nigel-richards-the-best-scrabble-player-on-earth/)

    -   #### [The Odds Of Winning The Indianapolis Colts’ Weather Challenge](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-odds-of-winning-the-indianapolis-colts-weather-challenge/)

    -   #### [In Science, It Matters That Women Come Last](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/in-science-it-matters-that-women-come-last/)

    -   [All Life](http://fivethirtyeight.com/life/)

-   [Sports](http://fivethirtyeight.com/sports/)
    -   [![LeBron James waits for play to resume in a 2010 NBA game
        against the New Orleans Hornets in
        Cleveland.](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/lebrons-decision-basketball.jpg?w=300&h=225&crop=1)](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/these-cavs-could-be-lebrons-best-supporting-cast-ever/)

        ### [These Cavs Could Be LeBron’s Best Supporting Cast Ever](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/these-cavs-could-be-lebrons-best-supporting-cast-ever/)

    -   #### [What Makes Nigel Richards The Best Scrabble Player On Earth](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-makes-nigel-richards-the-best-scrabble-player-on-earth/)

    -   #### [What Happens To Injured NBA Stars Like Paul George?](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-happens-to-injured-nba-stars-like-paul-george/)

    -   [All Sports](http://fivethirtyeight.com/sports/)

[Economics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/economics/)
--------------------------------------------------

![A store displays banners and placards announcing its closure in
Washington, D.C., in
2011.](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/was3759006.jpg?w=1024&h=260&crop=1)

A store displays banners and placards announcing its closure in
Washington, D.C., in 2011.

JEWEL SAMAD / AFP via Getty Images

[](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-american-opinion-is-split-on-the-child-migrant-crisis/)

[Previous](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-american-opinion-is-split-on-the-child-migrant-crisis/)

#### Why American Opinion Is Split On The Child Migrant Crisis

[](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-makes-nigel-richards-the-best-scrabble-player-on-earth/)

[Next](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-makes-nigel-richards-the-best-scrabble-player-on-earth/)

#### What Makes Nigel Richards The Best Scrabble Player On Earth

### Share this:

-   [Print](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-hasnt-been-disrupted/#print "Click to print")
-   [Twitter](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-hasnt-been-disrupted/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")
-   [Facebook](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-hasnt-been-disrupted/?share=facebook "Share on Facebook")
-   

[Our Changing
Economy](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/our-changing-economy/) 7:25 AM
Aug 8, 2014

[Corporate America Hasn’t Been Disrupted](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-hasnt-been-disrupted/)
======================================================================================================================

By [Ben
Casselman](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/ben-casselman/ "Posts by Ben Casselman")

Talk to anyone in Silicon Valley these days, and it’s hard to go more
than two minutes without hearing about “disruption.” Uber is disrupting
the taxi business. Airbnb is disrupting the hotel business. Apple’s
iTunes disrupted the music industry, but now risks being disrupted by
Spotify. Listen long enough, and it’s hard not to conclude that existing
companies, no matter how big and powerful, are all but doomed, marking
time until their inevitable overthrow by hoodie-wearing innovators.

In fact, the opposite is true. By a wide range of measures, the
advantages of incumbency in corporate America have never been greater.
“The business sector of the United States,” economists Ian Hathaway and
Robert Litan wrote in a recent [Brookings Institution
paper](http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2014/07/aging%20america%20increasing%20dominance%20older%20firms%20litan/other_aging_america_dominance_older_firms_hathaway_litan.pdf'),
“appears to be getting ‘old and fat.’”[^1^](#fn-1)

Hathaway and Litan say the trend is worrisome, and other economists who
have studied the issue agree. Entrepreneurship is a critical source of
jobs in the economy. Perhaps even more importantly, it is a [major
driver of productivity
growth](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/chad.syverson/research/productivitysurvey.pdf).
New companies, after all, often arise from an idea about how to do
something better, whether it’s making cars or brewing coffee. Many of
those ideas fail to pan out, but the ones that work can change entire
industries — can be, in other words, “disruptive.”[^2^](#fn-2)

But recent research suggests that established businesses have less and
less to fear from would-be disruptors. This is partly because, as I
[noted this
spring](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-slow-death-of-american-entrepreneurship/),
fewer Americans are launching businesses. In the late 1970s, according
to data from the Census Bureau, 15 percent of all U.S. businesses were
startups, meaning they had been founded in the past year. In 2011, the
latest data available, the so-called startup rate had fallen to 8
percent. Measured in terms of employment, the drop has been even
steeper.

![casselman-feature-disruption-1](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/casselman-feature-disruption-1.png?w=610&h=468)

But the issue isn’t just that there are fewer startups. It’s also that
fewer of them are succeeding. In 2011, more than 27 percent of new
companies went out of business in their first year, up from about 20
percent two decades earlier.[^3^](#fn-3) Even companies that do make it
to their first birthday are failing at higher rates than in the past,
though that trend is more recent and hasn’t been as steady. The only
groups of companies that haven’t seen their failure rate rise
meaningfully, Hathaway and Litan found, were ones that had been in
business more than 15 years.

![casselman-feature-disruption-2](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/casselman-feature-disruption-2.png?w=610&h=463)

In other words, the advantage enjoyed by incumbents, always substantial,
has been growing in recent years. In 2008, for the first time since
records have been kept, and likely for the first time in U.S. history,
more Americans worked for big companies — those with at least 500
employees — than for small ones. In the late 1980s, two-thirds of U.S.
companies were 10 years old or less. In 2011, only about half were.

![casselman-feature-disruption-3](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/casselman-feature-disruption-3.png?w=610&h=463)

Large companies are becoming more dominant in part by buying up their
rivals. Hathaway and Litan find that, not surprisingly, most major
industries have become more consolidated over time, as Wal-Mart and
Starbucks have displaced corner stores and coffee shops.[^4^](#fn-4)
It’s a lot harder to compete with a multi-billion-dollar multinational
company than with an independent business.

Consolidation could explain at least part of the rising failure rate
among startups. There’s at least anecdotal evidence that big
conglomerates are snapping up their most promising competitors before
they get a chance to become a real threat. Facebook, for example, [paid
$19
billion](http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/02/19/us-whatsapp-facebook-idUSBREA1I26B20140219)
for upstart messaging service WhatsApp earlier this year in what was
widely seen as an attempt to head off a nascent competitor. Moreover,
consolidation has been particularly strong in the finance sector, which
could be sending ripple effects through other industries; community
banks, which are a key source of financing for many startups, have been
steadily subsumed by giants like Bank of America and Wells Fargo.

Consolidation would be, on some level, a comforting explanation for the
decline in entrepreneurship, because it would suggest that much of the
drop has been among small, relatively inefficient businesses. The
disappearance of corner stores and other mom-and-pop businesses might
have worrying sociological consequences, but from a purely economic
standpoint, it’s largely good news. Big companies not only tend to be
more efficient, they [pay higher
wages](http://www.nber.org/papers/w20313) and offer employees more room
for advancement. Economists are [much more
interested](http://noahpinionblog.blogspot.com/2014/05/declining-us-dynamism-story-or-non-story.html)
in a specific kind of entrepreneurship: the comparatively small group of
fast-growing, innovative startups that drive productivity and jobs
growth.

But, it turns out, that kind of entrepreneurship is declining, too. In a
[recent working
paper](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/workshops/appliedecon/pdf/Haltiwangersecular.pdf),
economists Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger and two co-authors find that
while the decline of mom-and-pop businesses accounts for much of the
early decline in entrepreneurship, it has played much less of a role
since 2000. In recent years, the slowdown has been much more widespread,
even hitting [the high-tech
sector](http://www.kauffman.org/~/media/kauffman_org/research%20reports%20and%20covers/2014/02/declining_business_dynamism_in_us_high_tech_sector.pdf).[^5^](#fn-5)

Indeed, one of the most striking things about the trend is its
universality. The startup rate has declined in every major industry,
every state and [nearly every
city](http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2014/05/declining%20business%20dynamism%20litan/declining_business_dynamism_hathaway_litan.pdf),
and the failure rate’s rise has been nearly as universal. Here, for
example, are the trends for the San Francisco metro area, supposedly
ground zero for the startup economy:

![casselman-feature-disruption-4](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/casselman-feature-disruption-4.png?w=610&h=464)

Any explanation, then, has to be broad enough to explain an
entrepreneurial slowdown that has lasted for decades and transcends
industry and geography. Researchers have been able to rule out some of
the most obvious potential answers. As I [argued earlier this
week](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/dont-blame-age-for-declining-u-s-entrepreneurship/),
the aging of the U.S. population is, at most, a partial explanation,
since the declining startup rate began at a time when baby boomers were
still entering their prime entrepreneurial years. Nor does the trend
reflect the shifting industrial makeup of the U.S. economy, such as the
long decline in manufacturing and the rise of the service sector. In
fact, that shift should have had the [opposite
effect](http://econweb.umd.edu/~haltiwan/DHJM_JEP_5_17_2013.pdf):
Startup rates tend to be higher in the service sector than in
capital-intensive industries like manufacturing, so the shift toward a
service economy would, on its own, tend to increase entrepreneurship in
the economy as a whole.

In [another paper published last
week](http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.28.3.3), Decker and
Haltiwanger, both at the University of Maryland, offered two categories
of explanation, one more worrisome and one more benign. The more benign
explanation is that something, perhaps improved technology, has made it
easier for companies to become more efficient on their own. Imagine, for
example, that a manager at a Home Depot in Dallas comes up with a better
way of managing inventory. Thanks to better analytics software, someone
at corporate headquarters is more likely to notice the improvement and
be able to roll out the innovation to the rest of the chain. In that
scenario, the hardware industry, and the economy more broadly, reaps the
benefits of the new idea without the manager needing to take the risk of
leaving Home Depot to launch a rival business.

The more pessimistic explanation is that government regulation or some
other structural shift has made it harder for upstarts to take on
established companies. Maybe the Dallas Home Depot manager wants to
strike out on his own but can’t get a building permit, raise the startup
capital, or afford to comply with federal environmental regulations. So
either he tries and fails, or he never tries at all.[^6^](#fn-6)

Haltiwanger, who was one of the first to document the decline in
entrepreneurship, said it’s unclear which explanation is right, or
whether each is playing some role. It’s hard to quantify the impact of
technology in many industries, for example. And although there is [some
evidence](https://www.ij.org/license-to-work-release-5-8-12) that
licensure requirements have become a major barrier to entrepreneurship,
there’s no comprehensive list of government regulations at the local,
state and federal level.

But, Haltiwanger added, the evidence suggests that the pessimistic
explanation is at least partly right. The post-2000 decline in
high-growth entrepreneurship has corresponded with a period of weak
growth in both jobs and
[productivity](http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/wp2014-15.pdf)
— exactly what we would expect to see if reduced entrepreneurship were
leading to a broader economic slowdown. Other measures of economic
dynamism, such as job turnover and geographic mobility, have declined
over the same period.

“Taken together,” Decker and Haltiwanger wrote in their recent paper,
“there appears to be less scope for the U.S. economy to adjust to
changing economic conditions through the migration of workers, the
reallocation of jobs across producers, and through the switching of
workers across a given allocation of jobs.”

The U.S. economy, in other words, has become less flexible, more
risk-averse and slower to react to changing circumstances. Maybe it
could use a little disruption.

### Footnotes

1.  The “old and fat” line was [first
    used](http://updatedpriors.blogspot.com/2013/03/were-getting-old-and-fat.html)
    by Ryan Decker on his blog, Updated Priors. [\^](#ss-1)
2.  In [a recent article in The New
    Yorker](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/06/23/the-disruption-machine),
    Jill Lepore questioned the validity of the theory of disruptive
    innovation as developed by Harvard Business School professor Clayton
    Christensen. Christensen has defended his research, though he has
    criticized the buzzword-ification of the term. But whether or not
    Christensen’s theory of disruption is well founded, a large body of
    economic research has linked productivity and entrepreneurship.
    [\^](#ss-2)
3.  These so-called deaths don’t include companies that were acquired
    and kept operating under their new owners. [\^](#ss-3)
4.  Hathaway and Litan find that consolidation isn’t directly causing
    the aging of American businesses, but say it could be having an
    indirect effect. [\^](#ss-4)
5.  Decker has a less technical description of this finding [on his
    blog](http://updatedpriors.blogspot.com/2014/08/entrepreneurial-decline-mom-n-pop-or.html).
    The working paper itself also provides additional evidence that the
    incumbency advantage is growing. As one would expect,
    more-productive startups are more likely to survive than
    less-productive ones. But that effect has weakened since 2000,
    suggesting that even truly innovative businesses are struggling to
    break in. [\^](#ss-5)
6.  One intriguing issue here is the impact of the Affordable Care Act,
    which in theory could make it easier for people to leave jobs to
    start their own businesses. It’s still too soon to know whether
    that’s actually happening, however. [\^](#ss-6)

Filed under [Disruption](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/disruption/),
[entrepreneurship](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/entrepreneurship/),
[Mom And Pop](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/mom-and-pop/), [Our
Changing Economy](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/our-changing-economy/),
[Silicon Valley](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/silicon-valley/),
[Startups](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/startups/)

[![BENCASSELMAN2\_LIGHT](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/bencasselman2_light.jpg?w=106)](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/ben-casselman/)

### [Ben Casselman](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/ben-casselman/) [** @bencasselman](http://twitter.com/bencasselman) [**](mailto:ben.casselman@fivethirtyeight.com)

Ben Casselman is FiveThirtyEight’s chief economics writer.

### comments Add Comment

-   [More Ben Casselman](#tab-author)
-   [More Our Changing Economy](#tab-tag)
-   [More Economics](#tab-vertical)

### [It’s Too Soon to Celebrate the Drop in Long-Term Unemployment](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/its-too-soon-to-celebrate-the-drop-in-long-term-unemployment/) Jul 31

### [North Dakota’s Oil Bonanza Is Unsustainable](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/north-dakotas-oil-bonanza-is-unsustainable/) Jul 21

### [Immigration Is Changing Much More Than the Immigration Debate](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/immigration-is-changing-much-more-than-the-immigration-debate/) Jul 9

### [It’s Hard to Get Off the Couch When You’re Unemployed](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/its-hard-to-get-off-the-couch-when-youre-unemployed/) Jun 19

[All Ben
Casselman](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/ben-casselman/)

### [It’s Hard to Get Off the Couch When You’re Unemployed](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/its-hard-to-get-off-the-couch-when-youre-unemployed/) Jun 19

### [Public Schools Are Hurting More in the Recovery Than in the Recession](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/public-schools-are-hurting-more-in-the-recovery-than-in-the-recession/) Jun 10

### [Why We Still Can’t Afford to Fix America’s Broken Infrastructure](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-we-still-cant-afford-to-fix-americas-broken-infrastructure/) Jun 3

### [Cutting Off Emergency Unemployment Benefits Hasn’t Pushed People Back to Work](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/cutting-off-emergency-unemployment-benefits-hasnt-pushed-people-back-to-work/) May 22

[All Our Changing
Economy](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/our-changing-economy/)

### [It’s Too Soon to Celebrate the Drop in Long-Term Unemployment](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/its-too-soon-to-celebrate-the-drop-in-long-term-unemployment/) Jul 31

### [Even After 25 Years, Pete Rose’s Ban From Baseball Is Money in the Bank](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/even-after-25-years-pete-roses-ban-from-baseball-is-money-in-the-bank/) Jul 31

### [North Dakota’s Oil Bonanza Is Unsustainable](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/north-dakotas-oil-bonanza-is-unsustainable/) Jul 21

### [Corporate America Is Enriching Shareholders at the Expense of the Economy](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-is-enriching-shareholders-at-the-expense-of-the-economy/) Jul 15

[All Economics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/economics/)

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=300x250,1x1;)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/espn.fivethirtyeight.com.economics/story;sp=fivethirtyeight;objid=49168;col=casselman_ben;sz=300x250,1x1;)

Top Stories
-----------

[![LeBron James waits for play to resume in a 2010 NBA game against the
New Orleans Hornets in
Cleveland.](http://espnfivethirtyeight.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/lebrons-decision-basketball.jpg?w=300&h=225&crop=1)](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/these-cavs-could-be-lebrons-best-supporting-cast-ever/)

[Team Effort](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/team-effort/)

### [These Cavs Could Be LeBron’s Best Supporting Cast Ever](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/these-cavs-could-be-lebrons-best-supporting-cast-ever/)

By [Neil
Paine](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/neil-paine/ "Posts by Neil Paine")

[Hope the Numbers
Help](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/hope-the-numbers-help/)

### [Dear Mona, How Many People Have Never Drunk Alcohol?](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/dear-mona-how-many-people-have-never-drunk-alcohol/)

By [Mona
Chalabi](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/mona-chalabi/ "Posts by Mona Chalabi")

[What's In A Word](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/whats-in-a-word/)

### [What Makes Nigel Richards The Best Scrabble Player On Earth](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-makes-nigel-richards-the-best-scrabble-player-on-earth/)

By [Oliver
Roeder](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/oliver-roeder/ "Posts by Oliver Roeder")

[2014 Midterms](http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/2014-midterms/)

### [Many Pollsters Are Clueless About Hawaii’s Senate Primary](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/racial-voting-lines-in-hawaii-senate-primary-leave-pollsters-mostly-clueless/)

By [Harry
Enten](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contributors/harry-enten/ "Posts by Harry Enten")

-   [Contact](http://fivethirtyeight.com/contact/)
-   [ESPN](http://espn.com)
-   [FiveThirtyEight](http://fivethirtyeight.com)
-   [RSS](http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/fear-not-readers-we-have-rss-feeds/)
-   [Masthead](http://fivethirtyeight.com/masthead/)

-   [Politics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/politics/)
-   [Economics](http://fivethirtyeight.com/economics/)
-   [Science](http://fivethirtyeight.com/science/)
-   [Life](http://fivethirtyeight.com/life/)
-   [Sports](http://fivethirtyeight.com/sports/)

[Terms of Use](http://disneytermsofuse.com/) and [Privacy Policy and
Safety Information/Your California Privacy
Rights](http://disneyprivacycenter.com/) are applicable to you. ©2014
ESPN Internet Ventures. All rights reserved. [Interest-Based
Ads](http://preferences-mgr.truste.com/?type=espn&affiliateId=148)

Powered by [WordPress.com VIP](http://vip.wordpress.com/)

![image](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-bin/m?ci=us-903969h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

![image](http://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/corporate-america-hasnt-been-disrupted/
