This is [Anti-pattern](/)—thoughts on programming and whatnot by
[Brandon Weiss](http://brandonweiss.me).

[GitHub Is Your Resume Now](/github-is-your-resume-now)
=======================================================

June 17, 2012

If you’re a programmer, the days of sending a CV when you apply for a
job are quickly coming to an end, if they haven’t already. No one really
wants to see your poorly formatted, badly designed Microsoft Word
template filled with irrelevant information you’ve carefully curated to
make you look like the best programmer ever, least of all me. I just
want to see what you’ve built and how you built it, and the best way to
see that is by looking at your GitHub account.

The problem is that while most programmers seem to understand and even
embrace GitHub as the new resume, few if any seem to have actually put
any thought or time into making their GitHub accounts look and work well
as such.

GitHub is more than just your social backup storage, it’s your
*portfolio* and it’s *public*. You can’t just dump everything there
willy-nilly or your account is going to look like shit, which it
probably does.

So here are some really obvious things that most people do wrong with
their GitHub accounts. Hopefully it’ll help.

Too many forked repositories
----------------------------

There’s nothing more annoying than looking at someone’s GitHub account
and seeing a bunch of forked repositories. If you have to maintain a
fork for some reason then fine, sometimes that’s necessary. But most of
the time you just make a fork to fix something, and then the changes get
accepted upstream and you’re done. If that happens delete the repo! Why
are you holding on to it? You can always re-fork it the next time you
want to work on it. As a rule, if you have a forked repository its
commit graph better have a ton of blue in it, otherwise it’s just noise
in your account.

Sharing anything and everything
-------------------------------

GitHub is your *portfolio*. A common mistake designers and artists make
is adding anything and everything they’ve ever done to their portfolios,
and then never getting rid of anything. They could do an entire spin-off
of Hoarders based around creative peoples' portfolios—it’s that bad.
Don’t make the same mistake with your GitHub account. Be judicious about
what you add; you have to curate your work, otherwise your
signal-to-noise ratio drops.

Missing or unclear descriptions
-------------------------------

Every project needs a clear, concise description. I don’t want to have
to read all your code in order to divine what your project does. If you
can’t tell me in one sentence what your project does, then you probably
don’t even understand the problem well-enough to be solving it.

Old repositories
----------------

The work you did a year or more ago couldn’t possibly still be relevant
today. If it is, you aren’t working hard enough or learning fast enough.
Get rid of anything you haven’t worked on in over a year.

Mediocre code
-------------

Quantity never trumps quality. If I see a few projects with mediocre
code I just extrapolate and assume *all* the projects are mediocre and
stop looking. I’d rather see two really good projects and nothing else
than eight mediocre ones mixed in with three good ones. Only add
projects to your account if you truly think it’s great or useful work.

* * * * *

Like it or not, GitHub is your resume now, and the projects you choose
to show tell everything about you, especially where you are spending
your time and how wisely. Don’t waste your time building unimportant
things. Identify a serious problem and write some really good,
well-tested code that makes it better. Then put it on GitHub so the
world can see, keeping in mind the issues I just outlined. Take good
care of your GitHub account and it will take good care of you.

\*[CV]: Curriculum Vitae

For more posts check out the [archive](/archive).

My name is [Brandon Weiss](http://brandonweiss.me), I'm a product hacker
living in San Francisco. I'm currently working on
[Canary](https://canaryup.com), previously co-founded
[Sqoot](http://sqoot.com), and built [Arrival](http://arrival.io).

You should [Follow @brandon\_weiss](https://twitter.com/brandon_weiss)
me on Twitter. You can also hit me up at
[brandon@anti-pattern.com](mailto:brandon@anti-pattern.com). And I still
think RSS is cool, so if you want to know when I post, please subscribe
to the [feed](/feed).

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://anti-pattern.com/github-is-your-resume-now
