[Visit Aeon Film](http://aeon.co/film)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Follow us [](https://twitter.com/#!/aeonmag)
[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)

Daily or Weekly

-   Search
-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about)
-   [Film](http://aeon.co/film)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon Magazine")

Daily Weekly

Newsletter

[](https://twitter.com/aeonmag)
[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)

-   [World Views](http://aeon.co/magazine/world-views/ "World Views")
-   [Nature &
    Cosmos](http://aeon.co/magazine/nature-and-cosmos/ "Nature and Cosmos")
-   [Being Human](http://aeon.co/magazine/being-human/ "Being Human")
-   [Living
    Together](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/ "Living Together")
-   [Altered
    States](http://aeon.co/magazine/altered-states/ "Altered States")

Votes for the future
====================

Democracies are notoriously short-sighted. With one simple device, we
could give unborn citizens a say in our present

by [Thomas
Wells](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/thomas-wells/ "Read more articles by Thomas Wells")
1,700 words

-   Read later or Kindle
    -   -   -   -   ![image](https://d1xnn692s7u6t6.cloudfront.net/white-15.png)Kindle

![Photo by Forrest J Ackerman
Collection/Corbis](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2014/04/AABK001080.jpg)

*Illustration from the Forrest J Ackerman Collection/Corbis*

[Thomas
Wells](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/thomas-wells/ "Read more articles by Thomas Wells")
is a philosopher based in Rotterdam in the Netherlands. He edits the
*Erasmus Journal for Philosophy and Economics* and blogs at The
Philosopher’s Beard.

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/a-mechanism-to-give-future-citizens-the-vote/#comments)

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/a-mechanism-to-give-future-citizens-the-vote/#comments)

Given the ferocity with which he opposed it, the Irish philosopher and
statesman Edmund Burke is not often accused of radicalism. Yet here he
is, writing in *Reflections on the Revolution in France*(1790):\
 Society is indeed a contract... a partnership not only between those
who are living, but between those who are living, those who are dead,
and those who are to be born.

Though it might not look it, this is a profoundly radical thought. We
already have a device with which to represent the wishes of past
generations. Constitutions, the voices of our history, do not chain us
to the past, for they can always be outvoted, but they do have a
powerful influence on what our societies do now. We lack any such
mechanism for considering the interests of future generations. And this
is a trickier problem than might at first be obvious. Indeed, the very
structure of reality seems to conspire against us.

While we might feel a sense of solidarity with past and future
generations alike, time’s arrow means that we must relate to each other
as members of a relay race team. This means that citizens downstream
from us in time are doubly disadvantaged compared with the upstream
generations. Our predecessors have *imposed* – unilaterally – the
consequences of their political negotiations upon us: their economic
regime, immigration policies, the national borders that they drew up.
But they were also able to *explain* themselves to us, giving us not
only the bare outcome of the US Constitution, for example, but also the
records of the debates about the principles behind it, such as the
Federalist Papers (1787-88). Such commentaries are a substantial source
of our respect for our ancestors' achievements, beyond their status as a
*fait accompli*.

By contrast, future generations must accept whatever we choose to
bequeath them, and they have no way of informing us of their values. In
this, they are even more helpless than foreigners, on whom our political
decisions about pollution, trade, war and so on are similarly imposed
without consent. Disenfranchised as they are, such foreigners can at
least petition their own governments to tell ours off, or engage with us
directly by writing articles in our newspapers about the justice of
their cause. The citizens of the future lack even this recourse.

The asymmetry between past and future is more than unfair. Our ancestors
are beyond harm; they cannot know if we disappoint them. Yet the
political decisions we make today will do more than just determine the
burdens of citizenship for our grandchildren. They also concern
existential dangers such as the likelihood of pandemics and
environmental collapse. Without a presence in our political system, the
plight of future citizens who might suffer or gain from our present
political decisions cannot be properly weighed. We need to give them a
voice.

How could we do that? After all, they can’t actually speak to us. Yet
even if we can’t know what future citizens will actually value and
believe in, we can still consider their *interests*, on the reasonable
assumption that they will somewhat resemble our own (everybody needs
breathable air, for example). Interests are much easier than wishes, and
quite suitable for representation by proxies.

So perhaps we should simply encourage current citizens to take up the
Burkean perspective and think of their civic duty in a more extended way
when casting votes. Could this work? People certainly do take up
political causes remote from their own immediate interests from time to
time, for example when they vote in solidarity with those poorer than
themselves. But this ideal solution founders on the manifest
short-termism of most actual voters. In reality, we have limited
empathetic and cognitive capacities. We are only human.

Let’s look at those limitations for a moment, in the hope that doing so
will suggest a solution to our problem. Firstly, the range of our
empathy is both narrow and short. We might cast votes for the future in
a restricted sense when we consider our children or grandchildren, but
this is not the same as voting as temporary stewards of the whole of
society. We should not limit our concern to the welfare of our own
family members. Furthermore, even when we *are* voting as parents, we
often struggle to consider our own children’s long-term future. For
example, while we do elect politicians who promise to invest in
education, we seem rather less enthusiastic about reforming the economy
to help young people build a prosperous life with dignity, because that
comes into conflict with our interests in our own economic security. We
fall short of the demands of even our narrowest loyalties.

> If current citizens can’t help but be short-sighted, perhaps we should
> consider introducing agents who can vote in a far-seeing and impartial
> way

Our second limitation is intellectual. It is difficult for us, as
individuals, to analyse the full cumulative effects of our political
decisions for future generations. It is hard enough to tell whether
entering the euro or invading Afghanistan is the right thing for our
country to do, even though we know at the time that these are big
decisions and their major consequences will be clear within a few years,
not decades. The cognitive challenge is far greater when we try to
calculate the full intergenerational cost of keeping the retirement age
at 65, or the optimal carbon policy to mitigate global warming. Human
voters just aren’t equal to the task.

The outlines of a solution to our problem begin to come into view. If
current citizens can’t help but be short-sighted, perhaps we should
consider introducing agents who can vote in a far-seeing and impartial
way. They would need to be credibly motivated to defend the basic
interests of future generations as a whole, rather than certain favoured
subsets, and they would require the expertise to calculate the long-term
actuarial implications of government policies. Such voters would have to
be more than human. I am thinking of civic organisations, such as
charitable foundations, environmentalist advocacy groups or non-partisan
think tanks. To ensure that these voters have some political weight –
but not too much – we might award eligible non-governmental
organisations (NGOs) equal shares of a block of votes adding up to, say,
10 per cent of the electorate.

The moral and legal status of such voters would be as *trustees* of the
generations to come. Trusteeship is a mature legal concept with
well-established professional codes of conduct and systems of external
accountability. It is specifically designed for situations in which one
person must exercise his or her best judgment to the benefit of others’
interests *without* considering their wishes.

Trusteeship has played a political role before – indeed it is the very
model for the role of elected legislators that Burke himself advocated,
as did the British political economist John Stuart Mill a century later.
All the same, we would certainly need to introduce some new rules and
legal instruments to ensure the success of this novel kind of political
trusteeship by organisations, and especially to protect them from
improper ‘presentist’ influence by partisan or commercial interests. To
ensure their independence, these organisations might have to demonstrate
popular support (say 50,000 unique citizen members), be
non-profit-making, comply with electoral campaign financing legislation
and so forth. But rather than discuss those specific practicalities, let
me turn to the principal advantages of this new electoral device.

As 10 per cent of the electorate, these NGOs would constitute a
significant constituency, but not an all-important or completely
homogenous one. That should be enough. As the Austrian political
economist Joseph Schumpeter put it, the democratic method is ‘that
institutional arrangement for arriving at political decisions in which
individuals acquire the power to decide by means of a competitive
struggle for the people’s vote’. It is in the nature of democracy that,
wherever there are votes, you will find politicians. All the mainstream
political parties will make a play for this new constituency, making
their policy platforms relevant to its various concerns, just as they do
for other single-issue constituencies, such as retirees and nativists.

> At least to some degree, the myopia built into the institutions of
> democracy would be overcome

This, incidentally, seems like a better result than we could expect if
we simply appointed such trustees directly to our upper legislatures.
The 26 Church of England bishops who sit in the UK House of Lords are
trustee legislators in this sense: they are charged with acting in the
interests of God. However, while they have a small degree of direct
influence over legislation, they have no clout at all on the electoral
battlefield where the ideas and principles behind the legislative agenda
are developed.

In contrast, the presence of trustee voters has the potential to benefit
democratic deliberation in general. They would make sustainability an
unavoidable political topic, one that politicians have to treat in a way
that is credible to these cognitively sophisticated agents. The improved
quality of politicians’ attention to the future would also help the
merely human voters who struggle to turn their moral concern for the
future into effective political choices. At least to some degree, the
myopia built into the institutions of democracy would be overcome.

As a matter of justice, the interests of future people deserve to be
taken into consideration in our decisions now. The choices we make about
decarbonising the economy, guaranteeing pension entitlements or funding
research into vaccines will have an enormous impact on the lives of
those who will be sitting where we are in just a few decades. We care
about these people – they are our fellow citizens after all, and our
children and grandchildren besides. Even if they haven’t been born yet,
they have a claim on our attention and consideration at the political
level. Our ethical values point one way, towards intergenerational
responsibility, but our political system points another, towards the
short-term horizon of the next election cycle. However we do it, we need
to find a way to make our political system take the future – and
everyone who inhabits it – into account.

*8 May 2014*

[](#top)

*Read more essays on
[democracy](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/democracy/),
[Government](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/government/) and
[Politics](http://aeon.co/magazine/topics/politics/)*

Comments

-   Oliver Milne

    This is all very well, but how are the 'trustees' to be selected?
    The halfhearted list of "civic organisations, such as charitable
    foundations, environmentalist advocacy groups or non-partisan think
    tanks" you give sounds to me like fertile ground to sow shell
    organisations for partisan interests. I'd be more inclined to have a
    certain percentage of MPs elected specifically as representatives of
    future generations, with their performance rated and rewarded (in
    the form of a variable payout for them or their inheritors) by
    voters 40 or 50 years down the line. But that's not a perfect
    solution either.

-   G

    Ultimately what we are talking about here is the search for a means
    of applying moral principles in the absence of any fear of
    retribution for failing to do so.

    Consider this as among the possibilities:

    'Do unto the future as you would have the past do unto you.'

    This is what I call 'the Diachronic Golden Rule,' which merely means
    'the Golden Rule applied across time.'

    We give thanks to our predecessors for the good they have given us,
    and we criticise them for the pain they have left us. How would we
    feel if our predecessors had not abolished slavery or defeated the
    Nazis, and we lived under the horrific results of a failure of that
    magnitude? How do we expect our descendants to feel about us if we
    leave them a world ravaged by climate crisis, where billions, and
    billions more, face lives that are nasty, brutish, and short, and
    without any hope?

    The Golden Rule normally works in the present: Do good to others,
    and others will do good to you in return. Do not harm others, and
    others will not harm you in return. This sense of reciprocity or
    balance works at every level from base self-interest, to the
    principle of being a law-abiding citizen, to the principle of
    transpersonal compassion or unconditional love.

    But what if there is no 'in return'? The real test of a moral
    principle is whether an individual or society lives by it regardless
    of any self-interest beyond the simple internal feedback of 'feeling
    good about oneself as a moral being.' The law-abiding citizen does
    not steal when the police aren't looking, and the Bodhisattva does
    not indulge in a moment of selfishness when the motors of karma are
    having a brief power outage.

    Do we adhere to our principles and follow our moral rules, in the
    absence of any possibility that those toward whom we act, could
    reward us for doing good, or punish us for doing harm? This is a
    test of moral character.

    Envision yourself having a conversation with someone 500 or 1,000,
    or 5,000 or 10,000 years in the future. What would they tell you
    about the world we have left them? What would that tell you about
    us?

    -   lakawak

        Well...since I am not a pathetic little bi\*ch, I know that the
        future generations will thank us for all the technological
        advancements we've made in the last 150 or so years.

    -   http://thewayitis.info/ Derek Roche

        That's real nice, G, in theory but how about in practice? I'd
        love to see my grandchildren's children enfranchised too but I'm
        having trouble identifying a suitably disinterested trustee. Any
        thoughts? And suppose we could agree on a suitable lobby
        group(s) or even custom-make one, what are the chances of
        getting bipartisan support *now* to enfranchise it? And suppose
        we could do that, who would write its constitution, how would it
        be funded, who would police the Future Police etc etc.

        Oh man, I hate being negative about such a good idea in theory
        but I just can't see it happening.

        -   G

            In practice you already teach your children and
            grandchildren about morals and ethics, and you talk with
            other parents and grandparents. So add this to the mix: get
            them to imagine having conversations with 'people in the
            future.' Teach them the diachronic golden rule just as you
            teach them the regular version.

            There's method to my madness here. 'The future' is something
            that most children, most people of any age, find inherently
            interesting. Asking them to 'imagine' those conversations
            gets them exercising the proverbial 'imagination muscles,'
            which helps strengthen them. Stronger imagination paired up
            with 'imagine the conversations' means they necessarily have
            to think about how \_other people\_ think, which teaches
            empathy.

            Then at the right moment, introduce a question such as 'what
            do people in the future think about all the pollution we're
            making now?' or any other instance of some problem we're
            creating for the people of the future. That gets them
            thinking about how what we do affects others. All along the
            way, they're 'making friends' with these people of their
            imagination: something children already know how to do.
            (We've all had 'imaginary friends' at one time or another.
            Atheists argue disparagingly that deities are 'imaginary
            friends' as well. To my mind, that shouldn't be so
            disparaging, because it implies we have a truly fantastic
            personal and cultural capacity for imagination, so let's use
            it!)

            Now what you have is a kid who has imaginary friends in the
            future, who s/he wants to know more about, and who s/he
            cares about in some way. The diachronic golden rule is an
            abstraction but this makes it more tangible. The lessons
            learned could stick with someone for a lifetime.

            And slowly but surely, the memes may percolate through the
            culture to the polnt where people routinely ask themselves
            (as members of certain First Nations tribes in North America
            routinely did when making important decisions), how will
            this affect people a number of generations from now? When
            that kind of thinking has reached a certain critical mass in
            the culture, the culture will change, subtly but none the
            less.

            But as for the question of how to embody a future
            trusteeship in government, I'm still thinking about that and
            haven't got any specific proposals to offer yet. When I do,
            you can be sure I'll make more too-long comments about
            them;-) Between now and then, I need to give it more
            thought. That's hardly a cop-out, any more than saying I
            don't know how to repair an automobile or perform ballet.
            Each of us offers what we can, and all these pieces together
            add up to something.

            -   http://thewayitis.info/ Derek Roche

                Here in Australia we actually had a Commission For The
                Future at one time (unenfranchised) but it was abolished
                by . . . the conservatives.

    -   Dr. Shekelstein

        The Nazi comment is debatable, even if unpopular. Some would
        argue that the world wouldn't be so bad.

-   Giovanni Campanella

    This might work if the role of the state as we know today were
    rejected. As long as members of the state (politicians all the way
    down to police officers) are allowed to initiate force on other
    people, there will always be abuse. Not only do you have a moral
    contradiction, but you have a logical contradiction. If taking
    someone's money by force is wrong, it must be wrong for other humans
    to do it as well, and that recognition of what is wrong does not
    change simply b/c there are certain amounts of people saying that it
    is okay (voting).

    We need a government that is voluntary from start to finish, top to
    bottom, and not have it be used to control other people, especially
    for good reasons (b/c well intentions are the reasons it gets away
    with abuse).

    Power corrupts - it's not just a historical re occurrence, it's
    scientifically proven. Any society that allows some members to do
    things that if other citizens did would be arrested of a crime, you
    will always get abuse, corruption and eventually collapse.

    No one owes you a pension unless the money was made legitimately and
    there as a clear contract and a contract with society must be
    voluntary.

    -   G

        Have you bought your own personal fire appliance yet?

        The former Chariman of the US Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan,
        was a strong adherent of the ideology you advocate. In fact he
        was a personal friend of Ayn Rand, and a member of her inner
        circle that read and presumably provided feedback on \_Atlas
        Shrugged\_ before it was published.

        He applied his philosophy to his deregulation of the banking
        industry. The result was the spectacular financial implosion of
        2008, the global economic crash, and the resulting economic
        depression.

        QED: Randism, as with Marxism, is a failed ideology, as
        demonstrated by its effects in the real world. It didn't even
        take a particularly large dose of it to nearly kill the patient:
        dosing the financial industry was quite sufficient.

        I don't want to live in a world where there is no government
        inspection service to protect me from infected food and
        unsanitary restaurants, and the only recourse if I drop dead of
        salmonella or e.coli is for my surviving family members to sue
        them for damages. Neither do the vast majority of us: the
        overwhelming majority.

        Personally I like the idea that if someone tries to break into
        my house, I can ring Emergency, and a police officer will come
        right around to impose a bit of government control on the
        burglar. So do the overwhelming majority of us, though I'm sure
        the burglar and his fellow crooks both petty and grand would
        love to argue that government should be voluntary.

        Government isn't the only entity that can take your money; a
        fraudulent investment scheme can do the job even more
        efficiently, as millions of formerly wealthy investors found out
        when they were robbed by crooks on Wall Street.

        Taxes are the price tag for civilisation. And civilisation is
        the price tag for living past the age of 35 or 40.

        On the other hand, I wholeheartedly support the efforts of the
        'Free State' group to do a full-fledged libertarian experiment
        in the State of New Hampshire, USA.

        If only there was a similar group seeking to do a full-fledged
        experiment in socialism in the neighboring State of Vermont, the
        combination of the two would be as close to a 'controlled
        experiment' as possible with anything involving government and
        economic policy. After which, we should all go revise our
        respective ideologies again, in light of the empirical findings.

        -   lakawak

            If you call the cops they will come right around and fix
            your problem?\
             Awwww..the naivety of children is SO adorable!

            -   Mirror

                So are you saying (sarcastically, if I'm reading this
                correctly) that the idea of having police is wrong, or
                is your comment about its current state of practice?

            -   G

                Ad-hom, you lose.

                Next time you get robbed, call an anarchist. Good luck!

        -   Hermit

            It seems to me what you're saying about Ayn Rand's
            philosophy is this: If a doctor prescribes a certain dose of
            a certain medicine as a cure for an ailment, and the patient
            takes only a partial dose, and gets worse, the prescription
            is wrong.

            -   G

                What I'm saying is that if a little of something gives
                you a convulsion, a lot more of it will probably kill
                you.

                I'll be really concrete about this: There are some
                famous interviews with Ayn Rand where she says,
                explicitly and in no uncertain terms, that any form of
                charity or active concern for others is evil, and
                unlimited selfishness is good. That is the ethic of
                antisocial personality disorder: or as we say
                colloquially, sociopathy. Interestingly, she thought
                Jesus himself to be a contemptible weakling and a bad
                influence on society. Those among the political right
                wing in the USA who espouse Rand whilst courting
                evangelical Christians ought to give that some thought.
                I would suggest that one cannot simultaneously be both
                Christian and Randian.

                Extreme ideologies fail. The most obvious recent example
                was the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and
                Russia. The Ayn Rand type of libertarianism is no less
                extreme, and we saw what it just did to the global
                economy when it was applied to the financial sector
                merely years ago.

                If we look at the places where the quality of life is
                highest by every available measure, what we find are
                mixed economies, part socialist and part capitalist,
                each force acting as a check-and-balance against the
                excesses of the other. Pragmatically, empirically,
                realistically, that's what works. That 'compound,' with
                two 'active ingredients,' is the right prescription.

-   lakawak

    Blogs are almost always pointless, but somehow, this one manages to
    top them all and be the MOST pointless article ever.

    -   Mirror

        Great. What does that say about people who spend time reading
        and commenting on articles they find pointless?

-   InklingBooks

    In the U.S. we legally kill off real members the next generation in
    numbers and at a rate faster that the Nazis killed Jews over the
    twelve years of their rule. Yet this silly writer wants to act on
    the pretense that people such as he really care about those not yet
    born and want to look out for their interests. It's a classic
    illustration of the madness that cause some to 'love' humanity in
    the abstract and hate it in the concrete.

    I'm no fool. I know precisely what he intends. Those NGOs won't
    include many (if any) prolife groups. None of that allowed. But
    they'll include a lot of ideologues who, unable to impose their
    agendas by any democratic process, want to set the pretense that it
    is is they who care about generations yet unborn.

    Sorry, but I don't buy that. If you don't care about the unborn
    generations who actually exist in mommy's tummies, then you
    certainly don't care about those who'll be born half-a-century or
    more in the future.

    --Michael W. Perry, Lily's Ride: Rescuing her Father from the Ku
    Klux Klan

-   http://commentaramapolitics.blogspot.com/ tryanmax

    You're basically arguing for giving PACs and corporations a vote.

-   Nim B.

    Isn't there also a problem with numbers? That is, how many future
    generations are the trustees to take into consideration. Let's
    stipulate that there will be at least 10,000 future generations of
    humans. That is quite a lot of demand for, say, oil. Their interest
    in having any oil radically outweighs all of the interests that the
    present generation has for burning up such a broadly useful
    resource. If the real price of oil were set in a market where all
    future generations were to compete as buyers, the current price for
    oil would be absolutely prohibitive. We wouldn't get to use a drop.
    That seems like an absurd result. How can we give future generations
    a just voice and yet not let their sheer numbers grant them too much
    say?

-   Felix Erwin

    This is a great and grandeous idea, as was Marxism, in theory.
    Practically speaking it can never work. Look at the communist
    countries, and you will see political corruption and repression on
    an intolerable scale for the free world. Even if I thought it would
    work today, it is fundamentally flawed some time in the future, and
    who would want to bequeath that. If there are like-minded people in
    the world they will vote in step, as individuals, not as a
    committee. The past is a mantle, on which we (contemporaries) build
    our bridge to the future. Surely our sons and daughters would say
    that future is not ours to dictate.

-   Nemo\_of\_Erehwon

    "I am thinking of civic organisations, such as charitable
    foundations,\
     environmentalist advocacy groups or non-partisan think tanks."

    And I am thinking that I can guess which end of the political
    spectrum these disinterested trustees would come from.

-   Curious

    This is unbelievably stupid. We can't know what future humans will
    value. They might not be collectivists and statists who subscribe to
    modern American leftist conceptions of "social justice". This policy
    would very plausibly make future people worse off economically.

    If neurotic people had done this in the past, say in the 1860s -
    1920s, our world would be much worse today -- we would be worse off
    by almost every measure. If people had tried to shut down the dirty
    techologies just emerging back then, we'd have lost an entire arc of
    technological progress that has nourished and lengthened human life.
    This observation alone destroys Wells' argument, and reveals one of
    the underlying flaws -- a technological shortsightedness. Add to
    that an ignorance of economics, and how technological change
    happens.

    Wells is operating in parochial and pedestrian framework de jour of
    modern academia, and the popular acontextualism of modern
    philosophy, thinking that ethics is about trying to optimize other
    people's lives for them. It's a control freak phase of philosophy,
    and wildly short-sighted.

    -   Mike A.

        Please explain why the ''entire arc of technological progress
        that has nourished and lengthened human life" is worth the
        suffering it has, is, and will cause. How would be worse off? I
        can imagine a much better world where clean energy was pursued
        from the get-go, empires weren't created (because Western powers
        saw the harm and cycles of poverty it would create in the
        future) and human development was conscientously balanced with
        ecological limits. Only with a long-view towards the future can
        such insights be made, and that's exactly what Mr. Wells is
        proposing with his idea.

        Also, thinking ethics is about optimizing people's lives "for
        them" is not a "control freak phase of philosophy" but rather
        the whole purpose of government. We recognize humans are
        currently incapable of living in voluntary association with one
        another and that a government with a monopoly on force and
        various coercive powers is the best way to allocate resources,
        resolve conflict, normalize behavior, etc. It's our current
        answer to "human nature" (I reject the view that is static or
        necessarily exists, but our conception of it is slow to change).
        Every government action weighs the benefits and harms to people
        and ultimately results from such analysis. Of course
        self-interest, greed, corrpution, etc. have come to dominate
        that analysis but the ideal is still enshrined in the laws of
        the liberal states you deride.

        I agree with you that the future may not be statist or accept
        social justice but that's not a reason not to consider their
        interests as we can understand them today. Otherwise you'd have
        to prohibit any government action affecting children,
        incapacitated people who have no living will, power of attorney
        or similar document, or really anyone who has not explicitly
        proclaimed his/her desires. Consider the Nigerian girls who were
        kidnapped by Boko Haram. Since we have not heard from them we
        cannot know for certain if they want to be rescued. But who
        would challenge Nigerian government efforts to rescue its
        citizens from kidnapping? Just like the author suggests, we can
        empathize with their situation, conduct an imaginary
        conversation with a girl in that situation and come to the
        rather easy conclusion that rescuing them is the proper course
        of action.

        Future humans are certainly a tougher group to speculate about
        but that should not preclude us from doing so. Most major
        government policies are expected to be long-lasting and
        sustainable, Wells's idea simply extends our thinking.

-   ProfitOverLife

    This would never fly---the future, collective public interest, and
    even true self-interest, ALL have a heavy liberal bias that cannot
    and will not be tolerated by the selfish, self-destructive, and
    currently self-destructing Right.

-   cllrrupertread

    You might want to check out my similar proposal, previously:
    [http://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2012/jan/04/climate-politics-future-generation-justice](http://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2012/jan/04/climate-politics-future-generation-justice)

-   ApathyNihilism

    That solution is far from radical.

    A far more radical solution worth considering:\
     Allow all life to die out, by ceasing to reproduce. There will be
    no future generations to suffer the harm of our decisions.

-   http://Gajantic.com/ GajanticFounder

    Let's take this one step further. Article author Thomas Wells makes
    a super case for defending and enhancing future people's interests.

    Bestowing block voting rights on NGOs seems difficult to actually
    implement, though. So his solution as proposed in this article might
    not be sufficient.

    Nevertheless, he's on to something.

    The main troubles currently, as he describes, are that voters of the
    present are somewhat selfish, and are not particularly suited to
    predicting all the long-term effects of their votes today. Almost no
    one has time or resources to adequately investigate most topics for
    themselves.

    So why not help them/us?

    The NGOs Wells is thinking of try hard to eliminate both the
    problems individual voters have (too much self-interest and not
    enough foresight). Let's say they succeed, more or less.

    Let's have those NGOs inform voters of their recommendations, and
    how they developed those recommendations.

    We sort of do that now. In many societies around the world, civic
    organisations, charities, and other NGOs have access to effective
    media outlets.

    But currently, their messages are fragmented. It's very difficult
    for a concerned voter to find credible, representative information -
    about just about any weighty topic.

    So my recommendation is to gather NGOs' findings into one place,
    where anyone can see them. Might as well allow anyone else's
    opinion, too.

    We can trust people, when preparing to vote, to differentiate
    garbage from gold.

    A vibrant, defined, contained debate about any question put to
    voters. About all questions put to voters.

    Yes? No?

[![It could be you; in the House Chamber for the State of The Union
address. Photo by Pete Souza/The White
House/Corbis](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2014/01/House-of-Reps-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/forget-elections-lets-pick-reps-by-lottery/)

The lottocracy

Elections are flawed and can't be redeemed – it’s time to start choosing
our representatives by lottery

By Alexander Guerrero 3,500 words

[![A child waits for her mother at a polling station in Rome, 24
February, 2013. Photo by Yara
Nardi/Reuters](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/04/Child-elections-italy-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/henry-farrell-post-democracy/)

There is no alternative

Governments now answer to business, not voters. Mainstream parties grow
ever harder to distinguish. Is democracy dead?

By Henry Farrell 3,300 words

[![Villagers stand on top of a crashed rocket in the Altai territory,
where fuel is a major pollutant. Photo by Jonas
Bendiksen/Magnum](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/10/Fuller-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/right-and-left-are-fading-the-future-is-black-and-green/)

Ninety-degree revolution

Right and Left are fading away. The real question in politics will be:
do you look to the earth or aspire to the skies?

By Steve Fuller 2,100 words

![Jans-Mom\_FINAL](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Jans-Mom_FINAL1.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/featured/jans-mom-a-short-film-about-a-boy-with-a-mother-in-prison/)

Jan’s Mom
=========

With his mother in prison, 11-year-old Jan works up the courage to discuss her feelings – and his own
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anneloor van Heemstra

16 minutes

![Back-to-Land\_USE](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Back-to-Land_USE.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/featured/back-land-a-short-film-about-a-beached-blue-whale/)

Back to Land
============

The beached carcass of a blue whale – the planet’s largest animal – is a terrible, wondrous sight
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tijana Petrović

4 minutes

More films

[](#)

### Like us on Facebook

[](https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=aeonmag)

### Follow us on Twitter

[](#email-signup)

### Sign up to our newsletter

[Newsletter](#email-signup)

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Share

[Aeon](http://aeon.co/magazine/ "Aeon Magazine")

-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about/ "About Aeon")
-   [Our writers](http://aeon.co/magazine/contributors/ "Our writers")
-   [Most popular](http://aeon.co/magazine/most-popular/ "Most Popular")
-   [Aeon Film](http://aeon.co/film "Aeon Film")

© Aeon Media Ltd. 2014 Designed by
[magCulture](http://magculture.com/projects/ "magCulture")
[Privacy](http://aeon.co/magazine/privacy-policy/ "Privacy policy")

Sign up for our Daily or Weekly newsletter

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://aeon.co/magazine/living-together/a-mechanism-to-give-future-citizens-the-vote/
