**Welcome** ([sign
in](/account/signin/?next=/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/cass-sunstein-its-all-your-own-good/)
| [sign
up](https://subscribe.nybooks.info/ecom/nyb/app/live/web_user_maint?org=NYB&pagemode=a))

-   [** Google+](http://www.google.com/+nybooks)
-   [** Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/nybooks)
-   [** Twitter](http://twitter.com/nybooks)
-   [** RSS](/rss/)

[Shopping cart (0 items)](/catalog/cart/)

[**](#)
[![image](/media/static/assets/_assets/img/icon/nyrb_inv.png)](/?insrc=log)

[Advanced Search](/search/)

**Welcome** ([sign
in](/account/signin/?next=/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/cass-sunstein-its-all-your-own-good/)
| [sign
up](https://subscribe.nybooks.info/ecom/nyb/app/live/web_user_maint?org=NYB&pagemode=a))

-   [Shopping cart (0 items)](/catalog/cart/)
-   [Subscribe](/subscriptions/order/)
    -   [Start a Print
        Subscription](/subscriptions/order/ "Subscribe to The New York Review")
    -   [Print Premium
        Subscription](/subscriptions/premium/ "Start a Print Premium Subscription")
    -   [Give a Gift Subscription](/subscriptions/gift/ "Give a Gift")
    -   [Renew a Subscription](/renew/ "Renew your Subscriptions")
    -   [Online
        Edition](/subscriptions/online/ "Subscribe to the Online Edition")
    -   [Digital
        Editions](/subscriptions/digital-editions/ "Subscribe to a Digital Edition")
    -   [Academic/Institutional](/institution/ "Academic and Institutional Subscriptions")
    -   [Subscriber Alert](/subscriber-alert/ "Subscriber Alert!")

-   [Current Issue](/issues/current-issue/ "Table of Contents")
-   [Blogs](/blogs/)
    -   [NYRblog](/blogs/nyrblog/)
    -   [The Gallery](/blogs/gallery/)
    -   [Rereadings](/blogs/50-years/)

-   [Events](/events/ "Upcoming Events")
-   [Print Archive](/issues/)
-   [Classifieds](/classifieds/)
-   [Shop](/shop/ "Shop")
    -   [Illustrations](/galleries/)

-   [Newsletters](/newsletter/magazine/ "Sign Up for Our Newsletters")
-   [Books](/books/)

[![image](/media/static/assets/_assets/img/icon/NYRB.png)](/?insrc=log)

**

[Advanced Search](/search/)

-   [Subscribe](/subscriptions/order/)
    -   [Start a Print
        Subscription](/subscriptions/order/ "Subscribe to The New York Review")
    -   [Print Premium
        Subscription](/subscriptions/premium/ "Start a Print Premium Subscription")
    -   [Give a Gift Subscription](/subscriptions/gift/ "Give a Gift")
    -   [Renew a Subscription](/renew/ "Renew your Subscriptions")
    -   [Online
        Edition](/subscriptions/online/ "Subscribe to the Online Edition")
    -   [Digital
        Editions](/subscriptions/digital-editions/ "Subscribe to a Digital Edition")
    -   [Academic/Institutional](/institution/ "Academic and Institutional Subscriptions")
    -   [Subscriber Alert](/subscriber-alert/ "Subscriber Alert!")

-   [Current Issue](/issues/current-issue/ "Table of Contents")
-   [Blogs](/blogs/)
    -   [NYRblog](/blogs/nyrblog/)
    -   [The Gallery](/blogs/gallery/)
    -   [Rereadings](/blogs/50-years/)

-   [Events](/events/ "Upcoming Events")
-   [Print Archive](/issues/)
-   [Classifieds](/classifieds/)
-   [Shop](/shop/ "Shop")
    -   [Illustrations](/galleries/)

-   [Newsletters](/newsletter/magazine/ "Sign Up for Our Newsletters")
-   [![image](/media/static/assets/_assets/img/common/books.png)](/books/ "New York Review Books")

* * * * *

-   [Email](/mail_friend/5/26070/)
-   [Print](?pagination=false&printpage=true)
-   

-   [Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)
-   

It’s All for Your Own Good
--------------------------

[Jeremy Waldron](/contributors/jeremy-waldron-2/)

[October 9, 2014 Issue](/issues/2014/oct/09/)

#### [Why Nudge? The Politics of Libertarian Paternalism](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0300197861?ie=UTF8&tag=thneyoreofbo-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0300197861)![image](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=thneyoreofbo-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0300197861)

by Cass R. Sunstein

Yale University Press, 195 pp., $25.00

#### [Conspiracy Theories and Other Dangerous Ideas](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1476726620?ie=UTF8&tag=thneyoreofbo-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1476726620)![image](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=thneyoreofbo-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1476726620)

by Cass R. Sunstein

Simon and Schuster, 267 pp., $26.00

### 1.

In their book *Nudge*, Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein considered the
choices made by ordinary people about their retirement.^[1](#fn-1)^ Many
employees have the opportunity to enroll in a 401(k) plan, in which
their contributions will be sheltered from taxes and to which their
employer will also contribute. But a considerable number of people do
not choose to enroll in a 401(k) plan and of those who do, many select
levels of contribution that are far below what would be most
advantageous to them. Why? Probably because of inertia. It is easier not
to make a decision than go to the trouble of calculating an optimal
contribution.

[![image](/media/img/illustrations/sunstein_cass-100914_jpg_250x1676_q85.jpg)](/galleries/james-ferguson-illustrator/2014/oct/09/cass-r-sunstein/)
Cass R. Sunstein; drawing by James Ferguson

Employers sometimes try to educate people to make better choices,
offering them retirement-planning seminars, for example. But the lessons
of these seminars are soon forgotten: “Employees often leave educational
seminars excited about saving more but then fail to follow through on
their plans.” And so Sunstein and Thaler suggested a different strategy.
Instead of teaching people to overcome their inertia, we might take
advantage of their inertia to solve the problem. Suppose we arrange
things so that enrollment at some appropriate level of contribution is
the default position—the position that obtains if the employee does
nothing. Something has to be the default position; why not make it the
position that accrues most to the employee’s benefit, “using inertia to
increase savings rather than prevent savings”?

Resetting the default position this way is what Thaler and Sunstein call
a “nudge.” It exploits the structure of the choice to encourage a more
desirable option. The decision is not taken entirely out of the
employee’s hands. She can still change it and revert to a strategy of no
contributions or diminished contributions to her retirement funds. But
in that case she has to make an effort; this is where she has to
overcome her inertia.

Nudging is an attractive strategy. People are faced with choices all the
time, from products to pensions, from vacations to voting, from requests
for charity to ordering meals in a restaurant, and many of these choices
have to be made quickly or life would be overwhelming. For most cases
the sensible thing is not to agonize but to use a rule of thumb—a
*heuristic* is the technical term—to make the decision quickly. “If it
ain’t broke don’t fix it,” “Choose a round number,” “Always order the
special,” and “Vote the party line” are all heuristics. But the ones
people use are good for some decisions and not others, and they have
evolved over a series of past situations that may or may not resemble
the important choices people currently face.

Now, every decision we face presents its own “choice architecture,” in
which the possibilities we have to choose from are arrayed in a certain
order. Some make themselves clamorously known; others have to be
unearthed. There may be limited time to make a choice and then some
possibilities expire. Or if nothing is done, something may still come to
pass: there are default options (as opposed to possibilities a person
has to positively choose). There is no getting away from this: choices
are always going to be structured in some manner, whether it’s
deliberately designed or happens at random.

Nudging is about the self-conscious design of choice architecture. Put a
certain choice architecture together with a certain heuristic and you
will get a certain outcome. That’s the basic equation. So, if you want a
person to reach a desirable outcome and you can’t change the heuristic
she’s following, then you have to meddle with the choice architecture,
setting up one that when matched with the given heuristic delivers the
desirable outcome. That’s what we do when we nudge.

All of this sounds like a marketer’s dream, and I will say something
about its abusive possibilities later. But Sunstein and Thaler have in
mind that governments might do this in a way that promotes the interests
of their citizens. Governments might also encourage businesses and
employers to use it in the interests of their customers and employees.
The result would be a sort of soft paternalism: paternalism without the
constraint; a nudge rather than a shove; doing for people what they
would do for themselves if they had more time or greater ability to pick
out the better choice.

### 2.

Cass Sunstein is a Harvard law professor and the author of dozens of
books on the principles of public policy. He knew Barack Obama from
Harvard Law School and in 2009, he was appointed administrator of the
White House Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. Sunstein’s
thought about nudging is evidently the fruit of his determination to
consider alternatives to the old command-and-control models of
regulation. Now, with his government service behind him (for the time
being), he has given us another book, called *Why Nudge?*, in which he
provides an accessible defense of what he calls “libertarian
paternalism”—a good-natured paternalism that is supposed to leave
individual choosing intact.

“Paternalism” is usually a dirty word in political philosophy: the nanny
state passing regulations that restrict us for our own good, banning
smoking and skateboarding because they’re unsafe, or former New York
City Mayor Michael Bloomberg trying to limit the size of sugary sodas
sold in New York City—“the Big Gulp Ban.” Now, a nudger wouldn’t try
anything so crass. If you ordered a soda in nudge-world, you would get a
medium cup, no questions asked; you’d have to go out of your way to
insist on a large one. Not only that, but diet beverages would probably
be the ones displayed most prominently in nudge-world and served without
question unless the customer insisted on getting the classic version
from under the counter.

You could order a supersized sugary beverage if you wanted it badly
enough, but it wouldn’t be so convenient to carry it to your table
because Thaler and Sunstein are in favor of abolishing trays. It is all
too easy to load up a tray with food that will never be eaten and
napkins that go unused. You could insist on a tray if you wanted to hold
up the line, but a tray-free policy has been proved to lower food and
beverage waste by up to 50 percent in certain environments. *Nudge* and
*Why Nudge?* are replete with examples like this.

Nudging is paternalistic, but it is surely a very mild version of
paternalism. It’s about means, not ends: we don’t try to nudge people
toward a better view of the good life, with compulsory library cards,
for example, or PBS always coming up when you turn on your TV. And it is
mild too because you can always opt out of a nudge. Not that Sunstein is
opposed to more stringent regulations. Sometimes a straightforward
requirement—like the rule about seat belts—might be a better form of
paternalism. These options are left open for the regulator.

And actually there is nothing inherently paternalistic about nudging.
Salesmen and retailers use it all the time to promote their own
interests rather than ours. Even in the hands of governments, it can be
used to promote socially responsible as well as individually rational
outcomes. The tray-free policy in the cafeteria is one example. A nudge
toward organ donation is another: the assumption would now be that your
organs will be donated, though you can go to the trouble of checking “No
organ donation” on your driver’s license if you like. We can nudge for
the benefit of the environment, or nudge people toward charitable
donations. We might even nudge them toward certain forms of charity and
not others: there could be curbside devices resembling parking meters
that solicit charitable donations but nudge us away from giving loose
change to panhandlers, directing our pennies instead “to community
programs that provide meals, job training and education services,
substance abuse help, and affordable housing.”

Moreover, though a nudge may be different from a shove as far as
consumers are concerned, Sunstein is interested in requiring businesses
to nudge their consumers. A lot of the opposition to Mayor Bloomberg’s
Big Gulp Ban came not from soda-drinkers but from manufacturers and
retailers, who whipped up anti-paternalist sentiment among the guzzlers.
In nudge-world, retailers would have to be “motivated” to make the small
diet beverage the default option and banned from messing with the choice
architecture for their own benefit. Soft paternalism for the consumer
might therefore presuppose hard regulation for the retailer.

### 3.

All this seems sensible. Why then do people get so angry at Cass
Sunstein? He is, as I said, a prolific writer and on the back of another
of the books he has produced this year, his publishers have splashed a
number of vituperative blurbs describing this mild-mannered scholar as
“very, very strange…with his numerous bizarre claims” (Sarah Palin) and,
in the words of Glenn Beck, “the most evil man, the most dangerous man
in America.”

That book, *Conspiracy Theories and Other Dangerous Ideas*, looks from
its cover like it is going to be a pyrotechnic liberal manifesto—a sort
of *Mad* magazine for the White House. Sunstein says that “of the
hundreds of academic articles I have written, the most controversial
appear in these pages.” In fact, the eleven brief essays it contains
are, if anything, exasperatingly moderate. Sarah Palin tries to saddle
him with “the wacko belief that animals should have the right to sue in
court.” But a chapter in *Conspiracy Theories* argues that people should
have the right to sue in behalf of animals that are being cruelly
mistreated, which is hardly a “wacko” position.

So what explains the hostility? Much of it is simple animus against big
government, compounded by resentment of academics in office. But there
is also a core of genuine worry, and I want to use Sunstein’s writings
about nudging to try to bring that worry into focus.

Let’s think about the dramatis personae of Sunstein’s account. There
are, first of all, people, ordinary individuals with their heuristics,
their intuitions, and their rules of thumb, with their laziness, their
impulses, and their myopia. They have choices to make for themselves and
their loved ones, and they make some of them well and many of them
badly.

Then there are those whom Sunstein refers to as “we.” *We* know this,
*we* know that, and *we* know better about the way ordinary people make
their choices. *We* are the law professors and the behavioral economists
who (a) understand human choosing and its foibles much better than
members of the first group and (b) are in a position to design and
manipulate the architecture of the choices that face ordinary folk. In
other words, the members of this second group are endowed with a happy
combination of power and expertise.

Of course regulators are people too. And like the rest of us, they are
fallible. In the original *Nudge*, Sunstein engagingly confessed to many
of the decisional foibles that Thaler exposed. Worse, though, is the
fact that regulators are apt to make mistakes in their regulatory
behavior: “For every bias identified for individuals, there is an
accompanying bias in the public sphere.” Sometimes governments blunder
because they feel compelled to defer to the irrationalities of ordinary
people. But we all know they are perfectly capable of screwing things up
on their own, whether it’s the invasion of Iraq or the rollout of
Obamacare. There is a new book by two British political scientists
called *The Blunders of Our Governments* ^[2](#fn-2)^ that might serve
as a useful companion to *Why Nudge?*

[![waldron\_2-100914.png](/media/photo/2014/09/17/waldron_2-100914_png_600x428_q85.png)](/media/photo/2014/09/17/waldron_2-100914.png)

Sunstein is happy to acknowledge that public officials have their own
defective heuristics. But he cautions critics against using this point
as an “all-purpose bludgeon against initiatives that promise to do more
good than harm.” And he offers little more than reassurance that there
actually are good-hearted and competent folks like himself in
government:

> Government has in its employ many people whose business it is to
> calculate the consequences of alternative courses of action…. A large
> virtue of technocrats in government—specialists in science, economics,
> and law—is that they can help overcome some of the errors that might
> otherwise influence public as well as private judgments.

More reassuring, I think, would be a candid assessment of what might go
wrong with nudging. One of Sunstein’s many books (from before his time
in the White House) is entitled *Worst-Case Scenarios*.^[3](#fn-3)^
Could we please have something like that as a companion to *Nudge*?

I am afraid there is very little awareness in these books about the
problem of trust. Every day we are bombarded with offers whose choice
architecture is manipulated, not necessarily in our favor. The latest
deal from the phone company is designed to bamboozle us, and we may well
want such blandishments regulated. But it is not clear whether the
regulators themselves are trustworthy. Governments don’t just make
mistakes; they sometimes set out deliberately to mislead us. The
mendacity of elected officials is legendary and claims on our trust and
credulity have often been squandered. It is against this background that
we have to consider how nudging might be abused.

There are deeper questions, too, than these issues of trust and
competence. As befits someone who was “regulation czar” in the Obama
White House, Sunstein’s point of view is a rather lofty one and at times
it has an uncomfortable affinity with what Bernard Williams once called
“Government House utilitarianism.”^[4](#fn-4)^ Government House
utilitarianism was a moral philosophy that envisaged an elite who knew
the moral truth and could put out simple rules for the natives (or
ordinary people) to use, even though in the commissioner’s bungalow it
was known that the use of these rules would not always be justified.
*We* (the governors) know that lying, for example, is sometimes
justified, but we don’t want to let on to the natives, who may not have
the wit to figure out when this is so; we don’t trust them to make the
calculations that we make about when the ordinary rules should not be
followed. Williams saw the element of insult in this sort of approach to
morality, and I think it is discernable in Sunstein’s nudging as well.

For Sunstein’s idea is that we who know better should manipulate the
choice architecture so that those who are less likely to perceive what
is good for them can be induced to choose the options that *we* have
decided are in their best interest. Thaler and Sunstein talk sometimes
of “asymmetric paternalism.” The guiding principle of this approach

> is that we should design policies that help the least sophisticated
> people in society while imposing the smallest possible costs on the
> most sophisticated.

This is a benign impulse on their part, but it is not a million miles
away from the condescension that worried Bernard Williams.

### 4.

Deeper even than this is a prickly concern about dignity. What becomes
of the self-respect we invest in our own willed actions, flawed and
misguided though they often are, when so many of our choices are
manipulated to promote what someone else sees (perhaps rightly) as our
best interest? Sunstein is well aware that many will see the rigging of
choice through nudges as an affront to human dignity: I mean dignity in
the sense of self-respect, an individual’s awareness of her own worth as
a chooser. The term “dignity” did not appear in the book he wrote with
Thaler, but in *Why Nudge?* Sunstein concedes that this objection is
“intensely felt.” Practically everything he says about it, however, is
an attempt to brush dignity aside.

He begins by coupling the objection about dignity with an objection
about autonomy, the privileging of each individual’s independent control
of her life. The two go together, says Sunstein, though he acknowledges
that the complaint about dignity is the more fundamental of the two.
Having said that, however, Sunstein seems happy to associate himself
with those who maintain that dignity just equals autonomy or that if
there is anything left out of that equation, it is not worth bothering
with.^[5](#fn-5)^

Sunstein’s second move is to equate autonomy and well-being (or, more
crudely, “utility”—the economist’s word for the satisfaction of needs
and wants). He toys first with the idea that autonomy is just a
preference like any other. If people like choosing, he says, we can
design environments in which they are forced to state a preference—no
meal unless you order; no pension unless you opt in or opt out of a
401(k). I am afraid that’s a trivialization. Autonomy is not just one
preference among others; it is a principle about how one’s preferences
are pursued.

Eventually what we are told by Sunstein is that autonomy is just a
surrogate for welfare—what people ultimately want is the promotion of
their own well-being and it doesn’t really matter how that comes about.
At best autonomy is a heuristic: “People speak in terms of autonomy, but
what they are doing is making a rapid, intuitive judgment about
welfare.” I must say that I find all of this remarkably tone-deaf to
concerns about autonomy.

And allowing dignity to just drop out of the picture is offensive. For
by this stage, dignity is not being mentioned at all. Sunstein does
acknowledge that people might feel infantilized by being nudged. He says
that “people should not be regarded as children; they should be treated
with respect.” But saying that is not enough. We actually have to
reconcile nudging with a steadfast commitment to self-respect.

Consider the earlier point about heuristics—the rules for behavior that
we habitually follow. Nudging doesn’t teach me not to use inappropriate
heuristics or to abandon irrational intuitions or outdated rules of
thumb. It does not try to educate my choosing, for maybe I am
unteachable. Instead it builds on my foibles. It manipulates my sense of
the situation so that some heuristic—for example, a lazy feeling that I
don’t need to think about saving for retirement—which is in principle
inappropriate for the choice that I face, will still, thanks to a nudge,
yield the answer that rational reflection would yield. Instead of
teaching me to think actively about retirement, it takes advantage of my
inertia. Instead of teaching me not to automatically choose the first
item on the menu, it moves the objectively desirable items up to first
place.

I still use the same defective strategies but now things have been
arranged to make that work out better. Nudging takes advantage of my
deficiencies in the way one indulges a child. The people doing this (up
in Government House) are not exactly using me as a mere means in
violation of some Kantian imperative. They are supposed to be doing it
for my own good. Still, my choosing is being made a mere means to my
ends by somebody else—and I think this is what the concern about dignity
is all about.

To see the problem, it may help to think about a slightly different sort
of nudge—an informational nudge, where we manipulate the information
given to people who use certain heuristics, in order to achieve the
behavioral change that we figure the proper processing of correct
information would lead to.

For example: between 15 and 20 percent of regular smokers (let’s say men
sixty years old, who have smoked a pack a day for forty years) will die
of lung cancer. But regulators don’t publicize that number, even though
it ought to frighten people away from smoking, because they figure that
some smokers may irrationally take shelter in the complementary
statistic of the 80–85 percent of smokers who will *not* die of lung
cancer. So instead they say that smoking raises the chances of getting
lung cancer. That will nudge many people toward the right behavior, even
though it doesn’t in itself provide an assessment of how dangerous
smoking actually is (at least not without a baseline percentage of
nonsmokers who get cancer).

Or consider the way lawmakers nudge people away from drunk driving.
There are about 112 million self-reported episodes of alcohol-impaired
driving among adults in the US each year. Yet in 2010, the number of
people who were killed in alcohol-impaired driving crashes (10,228) was
an order of magnitude lower than that, i.e., almost one ten thousandth
of the number of incidents of DWI. The lawmakers don’t say that 0.009
percent of drunk drivers cause fatal accidents (implying, correctly,
that 99.991 percent of drunk drivers do not). They say instead that
alcohol is responsible for nearly one third (31 percent) of all
traffic-related deaths in the United States—which nudges people in the
right direction, even though in itself it tells us next to nothing about
how dangerous drunk driving is.

There’s a sense underlying such thinking that my capacities for thought
and for figuring things out are not really being taken seriously for
what they are: a part of my self. What matters above all for the use of
these nudges is appropriate behavior, and the authorities should try to
elicit it by whatever informational nudge is effective. We manipulate
things so that we get what would be the rational response to true
information by presenting information that strictly speaking is not
relevant to the decision.

I am not attributing informational nudging to Sunstein. But it helps us
see that any nudging can have a slightly demeaning or manipulative
character. Would the concern be mitigated if we insisted that nudgees
must always be told what’s going on? Perhaps. As long as all the facts
are in principle available, as long as it is possible to find out what
the nudger’s strategies are, maybe there is less of an affront to
self-respect. Sunstein says he is committed to transparency, but he does
acknowledge that some nudges have to operate “behind the back” of the
chooser.

It may seem a bit much to saddle Cass Sunstein with all this. The
objections about dignity and manipulation that I’ve been considering can
sound hysterical. It is perfectly reasonable for him to ask: “Is there
anything insulting or demeaning about automatic enrollment in savings
and health care plans, accompanied by unconstrained opt-out rights?” The
strategies he advocates, when used wisely and well, seem like a sensible
advance in public regulation, particularly when we consider them nudge
by nudge.

Still, it is another matter whether we should be so happy with what I
have called “nudge-world.” In that world almost every decision is
manipulated in this way. Choice architects nudge almost everything I
choose and do, and this is complemented by the independent activity of
marketers and salesmen, who nudge away furiously for their own benefit.
I’m not sure I want to live in nudge-world, though—as a notoriously poor
chooser—I appreciate the good-hearted and intelligent efforts of choice
architects such as Sunstein to make my autonomous life a little bit
better. I wish, though, that I could be made a better chooser rather
than having someone on high take advantage (even for my own benefit) of
my current thoughtlessness and my shabby intuitions.

1 *Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness* (Yale
University Press, 2008).
[↩](#fnr-1 "Jump back to footnote fn-1 in the text")

2 Anthony King and Ivor Crewe, *The Blunders of Our Governments*
(Oneworld, 2014). [↩](#fnr-2 "Jump back to footnote fn-2 in the text")

3 Harvard University Press, 2007.
[↩](#fnr-3 "Jump back to footnote fn-3 in the text")

4 Bernard Williams, *Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy* (Harvard
University Press, 1985), pp. 108–110.
[↩](#fnr-4 "Jump back to footnote fn-4 in the text")

5 See Ruth Macklin, “Dignity Is a Useless Concept,” *British Medical
Journal*, 327 (2003), and Steven Pinker, “The Stupidity of Dignity,”
*The New Republic*, May 28, 2008.
[↩](#fnr-5 "Jump back to footnote fn-5 in the text")

1.  1

    *Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness*
    (Yale University Press, 2008).
    [↩](#fnr-1 "Jump back to footnote fn-1 in the text")

2.  2

    Anthony King and Ivor Crewe, *The Blunders of Our Governments*
    (Oneworld, 2014).
    [↩](#fnr-2 "Jump back to footnote fn-2 in the text")

3.  3

    Harvard University Press, 2007.
    [↩](#fnr-3 "Jump back to footnote fn-3 in the text")

4.  4

    Bernard Williams, *Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy* (Harvard
    University Press, 1985), pp. 108–110.
    [↩](#fnr-4 "Jump back to footnote fn-4 in the text")

5.  5

    See Ruth Macklin, “Dignity Is a Useless Concept,” *British Medical
    Journal*, 327 (2003), and Steven Pinker, “The Stupidity of Dignity,”
    *The New Republic*, May 28, 2008.
    [↩](#fnr-5 "Jump back to footnote fn-5 in the text")

-   [Email](/mail_friend/5/26070/)
-   [Print](?pagination=false&printpage=true)
-   

-   [Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)
-   

### Related

[![image](/media/photo/2013/10/02/freeman_1-102413_jpg_300x200_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2013/oct/24/its-your-own-best-interest/?insrc=rel)

#### [It’s in Your Own Best Interest](/articles/archives/2013/oct/24/its-your-own-best-interest/?insrc=rel) **

[Samuel
Freeman](/articles/archives/2013/oct/24/its-your-own-best-interest/?insrc=rel)

[![image](/media/photo/2013/02/11/sunstein_1-030713_jpg_300x200_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2013/mar/07/its-your-own-good/?insrc=rel)

#### [It’s For Your Own Good!](/articles/archives/2013/mar/07/its-your-own-good/?insrc=rel) **

[Cass R.
Sunstein](/articles/archives/2013/mar/07/its-your-own-good/?insrc=rel)

[![image](/media/img/illustrations/orszag_peter-021110_jpg_300x200_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2010/feb/11/health-care-who-knows-best/?insrc=rel)

#### [Health Care: Who Knows ‘Best’?](/articles/archives/2010/feb/11/health-care-who-knows-best/?insrc=rel)

[Jerome
Groopman](/articles/archives/2010/feb/11/health-care-who-knows-best/?insrc=rel)

![The 50 Year Argument on
HBO](/media/advertising/NYR-50YearArgument.png "The 50 Year Argument on HBO")

[![October 9,
2014](/media/photo/2014/09/17/nyrb100914.png)](/issues/2014/oct/09/?insrc=wai)

#### Also in This Issue

—— October 9, 2014 ——

[![Israel & the US: The Delusions of Our
Diplomacy](/media/img/illustrations/kerry_John-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/israel-us-delusions-our-diplomacy/?insrc=wai)

##### [Why the US Gets Israel Wrong](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/israel-us-delusions-our-diplomacy/?insrc=wai)

[Nathan Thrall](/contributors/nathan-thrall-3/)

[![The Pillars of Arab
Despotism](/media/photo/2014/09/12/worth_1-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/pillars-arab-despotism/?insrc=wai)

##### [The Pillars of Arab Despotism](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/pillars-arab-despotism/?insrc=wai)

[Robert F. Worth](/contributors/robert-f-worth/)

[![Wonder
Boys?](/media/photo/2014/09/17/shaw_1-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/wonder-boys-genius/?insrc=wai)

##### [‘A History of Genius’](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/wonder-boys-genius/?insrc=wai)

[Tamsin Shaw](/contributors/tamsin-shaw/)

[![The Cut of
Coco](/media/photo/2014/09/17/muhlstein_1-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/cut-coco-chanel/?insrc=wai)

##### [The Cut of Coco](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/cut-coco-chanel/?insrc=wai)

[Anka Muhlstein](/contributors/anka-muhlstein/)

[![How Stoical Was
Seneca?](/media/photo/2014/09/17/beard_1-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/how-stoical-was-seneca/?insrc=wai)

##### [How Stoical Was Seneca?](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/how-stoical-was-seneca/?insrc=wai)

[Mary Beard](/contributors/beard-mary/)

[More **](/issues/2014/oct/09/?insrc=wai)

[![Subscribe to the New York
Review](/media/advertising/Subscribe2014-holiday-300x250.png "Subscribe to the New York Review")](/subscriptions/order/)

### —— New Posts ——

#### [NYRblog](/blogs/nyrblog/)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/NK002318__jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/24/enduring-voice-magda-olivero/?insrc=wbll)

##### [The Unstoppable Soprano](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/24/enduring-voice-magda-olivero/?insrc=wbll)

[Martin
Filler](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/24/enduring-voice-magda-olivero/?insrc=wbll)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/scottish_race_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/22/what-scotland-won/?insrc=wbll)

##### [What Scotland Won](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/22/what-scotland-won/?insrc=wbll)

[Jonathan
Freedland](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/22/what-scotland-won/?insrc=wbll)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/GettyImages_102023689_1_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/22/trial-ilham-tohti-they-dont-want-moderate-uighurs/?insrc=wbll)

##### [Jailing a Uighur Moderate](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/22/trial-ilham-tohti-they-dont-want-moderate-uighurs/?insrc=wbll)

[Ian
Johnson](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/22/trial-ilham-tohti-they-dont-want-moderate-uighurs/?insrc=wbll)

#### [The Gallery](/blogs/gallery/)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/Screen_Shot_2014-09-15_at_1.24.41_PM_png_63x63_crop_q85.png)](/blogs/gallery/2014/sep/23/plant-hunters/?insrc=wbll)

##### [Among the Plant Hunters](/blogs/gallery/2014/sep/23/plant-hunters/?insrc=wbll)

[Robin Lane Fox](/blogs/gallery/2014/sep/23/plant-hunters/?insrc=wbll)

### Free Newsletter

News of upcoming issues, contributors, special events, online features,
and more.

-   [Home](/)
-   [Contact Us](/contact/)
-   [About](/about/)
-   [Subscribe](/subscriptions/order/)
-   [Advertise](/advertising/)
-   [University Press
    Listing](/upress/ "New Titles from University Presses")
-   [Independent Press Listing](/ipl/ "Independent Press Listing")
-   [Help/FAQ](/about/faq/ "Frequently Asked Questions")
-   [Books](/books/)
-   [Terms of Service](/about/terms-of-service/)
-   [Feeds](/rss/)
-   [Newsletters](/newsletter/magazine/)

© 1963-2014 NYREV, Inc. All rights reserved.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/cass-sunstein-its-all-your-own-good/?insrc=hpma
