Next / [Previous](human.html) / [Shipman's Home Sweet
Homepage](http://www.nmt.edu/~shipman/) / [Site
map](http://www.nmt.edu/~shipman/sitemap.cgi) \

The Noel Smith-Wenkle Salary Negotiation Method
-----------------------------------------------

Salary negotiation is something at which hiring managers are usually a
lot more proficient than the people they hire. In the interest of
leveling the playing field, here is a method for salary negotiation that
has worked for me and many others.

Noel Smith-Wenkle is a headhunter, and he taught me this method in about
1982. Headhunters' fees are proportional to the salary that their
clients get, so it is in their interest to get as much as possible.

Disclaimer: This method was tuned for the hiring climate for
sought-after software developers in Silicon Valley in the early 80s, so
it may not work for any given situation. However, I think the principles
have general applicability. Your mileage may vary.

### Fundamentals

Salaries depend mainly on two things: the work and the geographical
area. Most companies share salary data with each other: the typical
big-company personnel department will have detailed breakdowns on the
distribution of salaries for their types of work and locales. So they
will generally know within a pretty narrow range what your job is worth.

To save labor costs, almost all companies play a nasty little game. They
ask you how much you want. Sometimes there's a slot on your application
named something innocent like "desired salary range." Most people
automatically fill in all blanks on a form, so they'll put down a
figure.

Unfortunately, many people underestimate their worth, so they'll put
down a low figure, less than the company was prepared to pay. It's a
rare company who will offer you what you're worth in this situation.
Some companies will even bargain down your already undervalued amount.

You're happy because you got what you asked for (or nearly so), and
they're happy because they're underpaying you and you're not likely to
realize it.

So, the bottom line is: **Don't tell them how much you'll take.**

Before you begin negotiating, you must have a minimum salary figure in
mind. If at all possible, you should talk to several people who are
doing similar work in an area with similar living costs. Watch out!
People from rural New Mexico, for example, have no idea how ungodly
expensive it is to live in the Bay Area or Boston.

Remember the bottom line, though: have a minimum figure in your head,
but *don't tell them*.

The purpose of the method is to get the company to be the first party to
name a number. If it's above your minimum, you accept. If it's too low,
you tell them it's too low, but you *do not say by how much*. They will
either break off negotiations or come back with a higher offer. Your
only responses are either "okay" or "higher", never "X amount higher."

### The method in action

If they try to get you to name a figure on the application, leave it
blank. You want them to ask for a number verbally.

**Step 1**. The first time they ask you how much you'll take, reply:

> I am much more interested in doing (type of work) here at (name of
> company) than I am in the size of the *initial* offer.

This sentence is constructed with great care. You may want to memorize
it. It does several things for you. It's great public relations. The
vast majority of people answer their question with a number. Because you
have focused on the job and not on the compensation, you have instantly
distinguished yourself from the thundering herd. You have also dodged
their question.

Noel said that about 40% of the time this is all you need, and the
hiring manager will go off and look up your numbers and make you a fair
offer. However, over half the time, they will ask you again.

**Step 2**. The second time they ask, reply:

> I will *consider* any *reasonable* offer.

This is basically a stalling tactic. The word \`\`consider'' has a lot
of leeway in it. Add to this the large amount of slop in the word
\`\`reasonable,'' and obviously the sentence has no meaning at all. But
you've been polite, and once more you've refused to name the first
figure.

Noel said that in only about 30% of the cases was it necessary to go to
step 3.

**Step 3**.

> You are in a much better position to know how much I'm worth to you
> than I am.

Once again, you have been polite, and again you have refused to name a
number. You have also told them, in so many words, that you are onto
their little game. If they ask a fourth or even a fifth time how much
you'll take (Noel said it rarely happens), repeat step 3.

* * * * *

**See also:** [How organizations work (or don't)](homepage.html)\
 **Previous:** [Readings in human factors](human.html)\
 [Site
map](http://www.nmt.edu/~shipman/planview.cgi?h=/u/shipman/www/&aa=prolog&zz=epilog)

* * * * *

[John W. Shipman](http://www.nmt.edu/~shipman/), <john@nmt.edu>

##### Last updated: 1996/01/21 20:43:30\
 URL: http://www.nmt.edu/\~shipman/org/noel.html

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://infohost.nmt.edu/~shipman/org/noel.html
