[![Atomic Object
Spin](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/themes/spin/images/AO-wordmark-white.png)](/)

Atomic Object's Blog On Software Design & Development

[Skip to content](#content "Skip navigation to the content")

### [We're hiring!](http://jobs.atomicobject.com/?utm_source=spin&utm_medium=header&utm_campaign=hiring "Visit our hiring info page")

We're actively seeking [designers and
developers](http://jobs.atomicobject.com/?utm_source=spin&utm_medium=header&utm_campaign=hiring)
for all three of our locations.

[« Tools & Practices for Remote Teams, Part 2 – Communicate,
Communicate,
Communicate!](http://spin.atomicobject.com/2014/09/02/remote-teams-communication/)

[Learning to Love Ember’s Dependency Injection
»](http://spin.atomicobject.com/2014/09/04/ember-dependency-injection/)

Visualizing Garbage Collection Algorithms
=========================================

By [Ken
Fox](http://spin.atomicobject.com/author/ken-fox/ "View all posts by Ken Fox")
| Published: September 3, 2014

Most developers take automatic garbage collection for granted. It’s just
another amazing feature provided by our language run-times to make our
jobs easier.

But if you try to peek inside a modern garbage collector, it’s very
difficult to see how they actually work. There are thousands of
implementation details that will confuse you unless you already have a
good understanding of what it’s trying to do and how they can go
fantastically wrong.

I’ve built a toy with five different garbage collection algorithms.
Small animations were created from the run-time behavior. You can find
larger animations and the code to create them at
[github.com/kenfox/gc-viz](https://github.com/kenfox/gc-viz). It
surprised me how much a simple animation reveals about these important
algorithms.

Cleanup At The End: aka No GC
-----------------------------

[![NO\_GC](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/NO_GC.gif)](https://github.com/kenfox/gc-viz/blob/master/docs/NO_GC.gif)The
simplest possible way of cleaning up garbage is to just wait until a
task is done and dispose of everything at once. This is a surprisingly
useful technique, especially if you have a way of breaking up a task
into pieces. The Apache web server, for example, creates a small pool of
memory per request and throws the entire pool away when the request
completes.

The small animation to the right represents a running program. The
entire image represents the program’s memory. Memory starts out colored
black, which means it isn’t used. Areas that flash bright green or
yellow are memory reads or writes. The color decays over time so you can
see how memory was used, but also see current activity. If you watch
carefully, you can see patterns emerge where the program begins to
ignore some memory. Those areas have become garbage — they are not used
and not reachable by the program. Everything else that isn’t garbage is
“live”.

The program easily fits in memory without needing to worry about
cleaning up garbage while the program is running. I’m going to stick
with this simple program for the rest of the examples.

Reference Counting Collector
----------------------------

[![REF\_COUNT\_GC](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/REF_COUNT_GC.gif)](https://github.com/kenfox/gc-viz/blob/master/docs/REF_COUNT_GC.gif)Another
simple solution is to keep a count of how many times you are using a
resource (an object in memory, in this case) and dispose of it when the
count drops to zero. This is the most common technique that developers
use when they add garbage collection to an existing system —it’s the
only garbage collector that easily integrates with other resource
managers and existing code bases. Apple learned this lesson after
releasing a mark-sweep collector for Objective-C. It caused so many
problems that they retracted the feature and replaced it with an
automated reference counting collector that works much better with
existing code.

The animation shows the same program as above, but this time it will try
to dispose of garbage by keeping a reference count on each object in
memory. The red flashes indicate reference counting activity. A very
useful property of reference counting is that garbage is detected as
soon as possible — you can sometimes see a flash of red immediately
followed by the area turning black.

Unfortunately reference counting has a lot of problems. Worst of all, it
can’t handle cyclic structures. These are very common — anything with a
parent or reverse reference creates a cycle which will leak memory.
Reference counting also has very high overhead — you can see in the
animation that red flashes are constantly happening even when memory use
is not increasing. Arithmetic is fast on a modern CPU, but memory is
slow, and the counters are being loaded and saved to memory often. All
these counter updates also make it difficult to have read-only or
thread-safe data.

Reference counting is an amortized algorithm (the overhead is spread
over the run-time of the program), but it’s an accidentally amortized
algorithm that can’t guarantee response times. For example, say a
program is working with a very large tree structure. The last piece of
the program that uses the tree will trigger the disposal of the entire
tree, which Murphy will guarantee happens when the user least desires
the delay. None of the other algorithms here are amortized either
though, so accidentally amortized may be a feature depending on your
data. (All of these algorithms do have concurrent or
partially-concurrent variations, but those are beyond the capabilities
of my toy program to demonstrate.)

Mark-Sweep Collector
--------------------

[![MARK\_SWEEP\_GC](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/MARK_SWEEP_GC.gif)](https://github.com/kenfox/gc-viz/blob/master/docs/MARK_SWEEP_GC.gif)Mark-sweep
eliminates some of the problems of reference count. It can easily handle
cyclic structures and it has lower overhead since it doesn’t need to
maintain counts.

It gives up being able to detect garbage immediately. You can see that
in the animation where there’s a period of activity without any red
flashes, then suddenly a bunch of red flashes indicate where it is
marking live objects. After marking is finished, it sweeps over all of
memory and disposes of garbage. You can see that in the animation too —
several areas turn black all at once instead of more spread out over
time in the reference counting approach.

Mark-sweep requires more implementation consistency than reference
counting and is more difficult to retrofit into existing systems. The
mark phase requires being able to traverse all live data, even data
encapsulated within an object. If an object doesn’t provide traversal,
it’s probably too risky to attempt to retrofit mark-sweep into the code.
The other weakness of mark-sweep is the fact the sweep phase must sweep
over all of memory to find garbage. For systems that do not generate
much garbage, this is not an issue, but modern functional programming
style generates enormous amounts of garbage.

Mark-Compact Collector
----------------------

[![MARK\_COMPACT\_GC](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/MARK_COMPACT_GC.gif)](https://github.com/kenfox/gc-viz/blob/master/docs/MARK_COMPACT_GC.gif)One
thing you may have noticed in the previous animations is that objects
never move. Once an object is allocated in memory, it stays in the same
place even if memory turns into a fragmented sea of islands surrounded
by black. The next two algorithms change that, but with completely
different approaches.

Mark-compact disposes of memory, not by just marking it free, but by
moving objects down into the free space. Objects always stay in the same
memory order — an object allocated before another object will always be
lower in memory — but gaps caused by disposed objects will be closed up
by objects moving down.

The crazy idea of moving objects means that new objects can always just
be created at the end of used memory. This is called a “bump” allocator
and is as cheap as stack allocation, but without the limitations of
stack size. Some systems using bump allocators don’t even use call
stacks for data storage, they just allocate call frames in the heap and
treat them like any other object.

Another benefit, sometimes more theory than practice, is that when
objects are compacted like this, programs have better memory access
patterns that are friendly to modern hardware memory caches. It’s far
from certain you will see this benefit, though — the memory allocators
used in reference counting and mark-sweep are complex, but also very
well debugged and very efficient.

Mark-compact is a complex algorithm requiring several passes over all
allocated objects. In the animation you can see the red flashes of live
object marking followed by lots of reads and writes as destinations are
computed, objects are moved and finally references are fixed to point to
where objects have moved. The main benefit of all this complexity is
operating under extremely low memory overhead. Oracle’s Hotspot JVM uses
several different garbage collection algorithms. The tenured object
space uses mark-compact.

Copying Collector
-----------------

[![COPY\_GC](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/COPY_GC.gif)](https://github.com/kenfox/gc-viz/blob/master/docs/COPY_GC.gif)The
last algorithm I’ve animated is the foundation of most high-performance
garbage collection systems. It’s a moving collector like mark-compact,
but it’s incredibly simple. It uses two memory spaces and simply copies
live objects back and forth between them. In practice, there are more
than two spaces and the spaces are used for different generations of
objects. New objects are created in one space, get copied to another
space if they survive, and finally copied to a tenured space if they are
very long-lived. If you hear a garbage collector described as
generational or ephemeral, it’s usually a multi-space copy collector.

Other than simplicity and flexibility, the main advantage of this
algorithm is that it only spends time on live objects. There is no
separate mark phase that must be later swept or compacted. Objects are
immediately copied during live object traversal, and object references
are patched up by following a broken-heart reference where the object
used to be.

In the animation, you can see there are several collections where almost
all the data is copied from one space to the other. This is a terrible
situation for this algorithm and shows one of the reasons why people
talk about tuning garbage collectors. If you can size your memory and
tune your allocations so that most objects are dead when the collection
begins, then you get a fantastic combination of safe functional
programming style and high performance.\

![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cfa8e0d8a0ef7edd0373c3a2561b9556?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
Ken Fox ([6 Posts](http://spin.atomicobject.com/author/ken-fox/))

This entry was posted in [Development
Techniques](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/development/development-techniques/ "View all posts in Development Techniques")
and tagged [algorithms](http://spin.atomicobject.com/tag/algorithms/),
[animation](http://spin.atomicobject.com/tag/animation/), [garbage
collection](http://spin.atomicobject.com/tag/garbage-collection/),
[visualization](http://spin.atomicobject.com/tag/visualization/).
Bookmark the
[permalink](http://spin.atomicobject.com/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/ "Permalink to Visualizing Garbage Collection Algorithms").
Trackbacks are closed, but you can [post a
comment](#respond "Post a comment").

[« Tools & Practices for Remote Teams, Part 2 – Communicate,
Communicate,
Communicate!](http://spin.atomicobject.com/2014/09/02/remote-teams-communication/)

[Learning to Love Ember’s Dependency Injection
»](http://spin.atomicobject.com/2014/09/04/ember-dependency-injection/)

### 14 Comments

1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e22c55418d08d83bc14c8d99336c9460?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    John Fisher

    Posted September 3, 2014 at 2:58 pm

    This is very interesting- great job with the visualizations!

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=238683#respond)

2.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8348bcf40f55bc5818651824369caff1?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    [Soner Gönül](http://sonergonul.net/)

    Posted September 3, 2014 at 3:34 pm

    Does .NET Framework use one of this algorithms?

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=238703#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cfa8e0d8a0ef7edd0373c3a2561b9556?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
        Ken Fox

        Posted September 3, 2014 at 4:49 pm

        Yes. The CLR has a generational collector. It’s like the copy
        collector visualization above, but a lot more sophisticated. The
        main complication is that it can run concurrently with your
        code–the collector runs in another thread and it uses a write
        barrier to make sure that your application code always sees a
        consistent view of memory.

        I don’t know any of the details behind Microsoft’s algorithms
        though, sorry.

        [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=238733#respond)

3.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/75699b60f5b187bb81596a4802af98a8?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    Tom

    Posted September 3, 2014 at 4:48 pm

    “Arithmetic is fast on a modern CPU, but memory is slow, and the
    counters are being loaded and saved to memory often.”

    This is true, but a GC algorithm can choose where to put the
    refcount data. OS X puts all refcounts in a hash table (not on the
    objects themselves), and with the huge CPU caches that x64 has these
    days, it’s probably already in the fastest memory it can be. iOS on
    ARM64 takes it a step further and puts the refcount (or at least the
    first 19 bits of it) right in the isa pointer, so you get the first
    half-a-million references almost for free.

    In general “memory” is slow but if it’s already in L1 there’s
    essentially no penalty (it’s about as fast to read from L1 as it is
    to execute an instruction). If it’s in L2, it’s only a 10x penalty.
    Using memory isn’t inherently bad. What matters is whether the
    algorithm is putting the most frequently used data in the fastest
    tiers of the memory hierarchy.

    “All these counter updates also make it difficult to have read-only
    or thread-safe data.”

    Well, yeah, threads are a dangerous tool, and thread safety is a
    hard problem no matter what strategy you use. That’s probably why
    all the cool multiprocessing languages that are newer than C
    (Erlang, Clojure, etc.) use completely different concurrency
    primitives. :-)

    “it’s an accidentally amortized algorithm that can’t guarantee
    response times.”

    True, but remember that most memory management systems in the world
    don’t guarantee response times — even good ol’ malloc/free, and even
    if you’re not using virtual memory! Real-time systems are a whole
    other can of worms. A fun can of worms, for sure, but not one that’s
    relevant to most programmers using most GC systems.

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=238732#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cfa8e0d8a0ef7edd0373c3a2561b9556?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
        Ken Fox

        Posted September 3, 2014 at 5:08 pm

        There’s no question that Apple has put a lot of effort into
        optimizing their reference counting system and I think that says
        a lot about how poorly a naive reference count algorithm
        performs. The external ref count table is a nice hack. They also
        avoid adding counts to the table when an object is
        constructed–it’s an optimization based on the weak generational
        hypothesis that most objects die young. Now that they’ve moved
        to ARC, Apple can do a lot more optimizations, but I haven’t
        been watching very closely since they announced the 64-bit
        object ISA field.

        A lot of Apple’s runtime is Open Source, but it’s not very easy
        to put all the pieces together.

        [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=238741#respond)

4.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7efeeb0d9fe2a53e84d0d77e2ab7e44e?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    Christopher Smith

    Posted September 4, 2014 at 3:35 am

    I’d argue that if anything copying collectors are more friendly to
    modern memory architectures. They do a reasonably good job of
    organizing related data based on time of allocation (which tends to
    correlated with access patterns), which tends to make caching work
    pretty well… effectively amortizing the costs of badly organized
    allocators in to “copies”, and leaving thing quite well optimized in
    between.

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=239110#respond)

5.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2345bf122a31fd3662cc405fc742756b?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    [Kushagra Sinha](http://www.j4nu5.com)

    Posted September 4, 2014 at 4:22 am

    Thanks for this great post!

    However, I disagree with “Unfortunately reference counting has a lot
    of problems. Worst of all, it **can’t** handle cyclic structures.”

    PHP (\>=5.3.0) uses reference counting but is still able to handle
    cyclic references.
    [Details](http://php.net/manual/en/features.gc.collecting-cycles.php).

    Another solution is to use weak\_ptr like in C++.

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=239146#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cfa8e0d8a0ef7edd0373c3a2561b9556?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
        Ken Fox

        Posted September 4, 2014 at 2:52 pm

        There are many extensions to reference counting–researchers keep
        looking at hybrid algorithms to improve GC performance. That PHP
        implementation is interesting and I hadn’t seen it before,
        thanks! PHP has a broken link to the paper, but you can find it
        in CiteSeer as “Concurrent cycle collection in reference counted
        systems” by Bacon and Rajan.
        ([http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.132.2464](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.132.2464))
        There are surprisingly few references to the paper.

        The extension to reference counting in the paper uses a tracing
        algorithm to find cycles. One of the practical implementation
        advantages of ref counts is that it doesn’t require tracing, so
        I’d almost give this a whole new category somewhere closer to
        mark-sweep.

        If you are interested in reference counting, there’s an even
        more advanced hybrid published by Microsoft last year. It was
        discussed on Lambda the Ultimate:
        [http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4825](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4825).

        On the subject of weak references, they can be added to any GC
        system. They are vital in ref count systems because of the cycle
        problem. Some people have spun them as describing object
        “ownership”, but I think that gives them a little too much
        importance. It’s a cool hack that gives extra information to the
        collector. If a programmer has to worry about them constantly,
        it’s a sign of a weak collector algorithm. (Non-existent in the
        case of C++!)

        [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=239667#respond)

6.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ca971ea79691888d185ab5a58ab1713d?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    Joseph

    Posted September 4, 2014 at 6:59 am

    By the way, were would you put Azul C4
    ([http://www.azulsystems.com/technology/c4-garbage-collector](http://www.azulsystems.com/technology/c4-garbage-collector)
    ) ?

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=239272#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cfa8e0d8a0ef7edd0373c3a2561b9556?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
        Ken Fox

        Posted September 4, 2014 at 3:13 pm

        I’ve never used Azul’s JVM, so this is the first I’ve read about
        it–it looks very interesting. C4 is a generational concurrent
        mark-compact collector. Anytime you get into concurrent
        collectors the complexity goes way way up. The mark-compact
        animation above can help you understand logically how the
        algorithm works, but Azul is compacting memory by changing the
        CPU’s TLB memory map. My animation makes it look like copying is
        expensive and that may not be true for this collector.

        [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=239683#respond)

        -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ca971ea79691888d185ab5a58ab1713d?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
            Joseph

            Posted September 4, 2014 at 3:17 pm

            Well, their previous garbage collector was pause less for
            large heaps, so quite something. They used to have to
            produce their own hardware, but since CPU makers (intel and
            AMD) did the changes they were asking for. AFAIK they were
            trying to get the proper “primitives” in the JVM in order to
            be able to stop producing their own, but it’s not the case
            yet.

            Over, their new C4 is unknown to me and seems just full of
            magic, hence the question. Thanks for your reponse :)

            [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=239685#respond)

7.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/99923dd71247b1f5c601889187f88fb9?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    Wyatt

    Posted September 5, 2014 at 9:17 am

    Thank you for not claiming ARC isn’t GC; I’m getting tired of
    telling people they need to read Jones & Lins. ;)

    (Better yet, you properly cover the time-cost drawbacks of the
    increment and decrement, as well as the freeing of dependent chains,
    which most people seem content to sweep under the rug! Bravo!)

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=240412#respond)

8.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fda1d077232bc0dc1b16bb850fbe577f?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
    Rob

    Posted September 8, 2014 at 1:54 am

    Re: “Cleanup At The End: aka No GC”

    There are different kinds of “No GC”, and “Cleanup At The End” isn’t
    really a realistic one.\
     Maybe you could add a more realistic “No GC” annimation for
    something like C++ RAII, what is probably the most viable real-live
    No-GC option in modern day programming.

    [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=242807#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cfa8e0d8a0ef7edd0373c3a2561b9556?s=80&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D80&r=G)
        Ken Fox

        Posted September 8, 2014 at 7:39 am

        Isn’t C++ RAII a good example of cleanup at the end? Allocations
        happen (usually upon entering scope) and then everything is
        destroyed when the scope exits. Inside the scope there is no GC.
        C++ also uses reference count techniques with shared\_ptr and
        unique\_ptr (which is a degenerate form of reference counting
        since there can be only 0 or 1 references).

        [Reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/?replytocom=243027#respond)

### Post a Comment [Cancel reply](/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/#respond)

Your email is *never* published nor shared. Required fields are marked
\*

Name \*

Email \*

Website

Comment

You may use these HTML tags and attributes:
`<a href="" title=""> <abbr title=""> <acronym title=""> <b> <blockquote cite=""> <cite> <code> <del datetime=""> <em> <i> <q cite=""> <strike> <strong> `

Don't subscribe All Replies to my comments Notify me of followup
comments via e-mail. You can also
[subscribe](http://spin.atomicobject.com/comment-subscriptions?srp=110344&sra=s)
without commenting.

-   ### Search

-   ### About Atomic Object

    We design and build world-class software for all sorts of clients.

    [Atomic
    Object](http://www.atomicobject.com/?utm_source=spin&utm_medium=widget&utm_campaign=about-ao)
    [Contact
    Us](http://www.atomicobject.com/pages/Contact+Us "Contact us on our website at atomicobject.com")

-   ### Categories

    -   [Atomic
        Thinking](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/atomic-thinking/ "View all posts filed under Atomic Thinking")
        -   [Business
            Practices](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/atomic-thinking/business-practices/ "View all posts filed under Business Practices")
        -   [Culture](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/atomic-thinking/culture-atomic/ "View all posts filed under Culture")
        -   [Communities](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/atomic-thinking/communities/ "View all posts filed under Communities")
        -   [Workplace](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/atomic-thinking/workplace-atomic/ "View all posts filed under Workplace")
        -   [News &
            Events](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/atomic-thinking/news-events/ "View all posts filed under News & Events")
        -   [Project
            Stories](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/atomic-thinking/project-stories/ "View all posts filed under Project Stories")

    -   [Resources for
        Clients](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/client-resources/ "How we work, and how it makes our clients' project stronger.")
        -   [Creating a Lean
            Startup](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/client-resources/creating-lean-startup/ "View all posts filed under Creating a Lean Startup")
        -   [Choosing Your
            Team](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/client-resources/choosing-team/ "View all posts filed under Choosing Your Team")
        -   [Planning Your
            Project](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/client-resources/planning-estimating/ "View all posts filed under Planning Your Project")
        -   [Designing for
            Users](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/client-resources/designing-users/ "View all posts filed under Designing for Users")
        -   [Managing Your
            Team](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/client-resources/managing-team/ "View all posts filed under Managing Your Team")
        -   [Technical
            Practices](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/client-resources/client-technical-practices/ "View all posts filed under Technical Practices")

    -   [Project & Team
        Management](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/project-team-mgmt/ "View all posts filed under Project & Team Management")
    -   [UX &
        Design](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/ux-design/ "View all posts filed under UX & Design")
        -   [UX/Design
            Practices](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/ux-design/ux-design-practices/ "View all posts filed under UX/Design Practices")
        -   [UX/Design
            Techniques](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/ux-design/uxdesign-techniques/ "View all posts filed under UX/Design Techniques")
        -   [UX/Design
            Tools](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/ux-design/ux-design-tools/ "View all posts filed under UX/Design Tools")
        -   [Exploratory
            Testing](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/ux-design/h-exploratory-testing/ "View all posts filed under Exploratory Testing")

    -   [Development](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/development/ "View all posts filed under Development")
        -   [Development
            Practices](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/development/development-practices/ "View all posts filed under Development Practices")
        -   [Development
            Techniques](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/development/development-techniques/ "View all posts filed under Development Techniques")
        -   [Developer
            Tools](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/development/developer-tools/ "View all posts filed under Developer Tools")

    -   [Platforms &
        Languages](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/ "View all posts filed under Platforms & Languages")
        -   [Functional
            Programming](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/funct-programming/ "View all posts filed under Functional Programming")
        -   [Presenter
            First](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/presenter-first-dev/ "View all posts filed under Presenter First")
        -   [Web
            Apps](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/web-apps/ "View all posts filed under Web Apps")
        -   [Mobile
            Apps](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/mobile-apps/ "View all posts filed under Mobile Apps")
        -   [Embedded
            Systems](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/embedded-systems/ "View all posts filed under Embedded Systems")
        -   [DevOps & System
            Admin.](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/devops/ "View all posts filed under DevOps & System Admin.")
        -   [Android](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/android-dev/ "View all posts filed under Android")
        -   [iOS / OS
            X](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/ios-osx/ "View all posts filed under iOS / OS X")
        -   [Objective-C](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/objective-c-dev/ "View all posts filed under Objective-C")
        -   [C &
            C++](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/c-c/ "View all posts filed under C & C++")
        -   [Java](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/java-dev/ "View all posts filed under Java")
        -   [Ember.js](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/ember-js/ "View all posts filed under Ember.js")
        -   [jRuby](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/jruby-dev/ "View all posts filed under jRuby")
        -   [Python](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/python-platforms-languages/ "View all posts filed under Python")
        -   [.NET /
            WPF](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/dotnet-wpf/ "View all posts filed under .NET / WPF")
        -   [Ruby](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/ruby-dev/ "View all posts filed under Ruby")
        -   [Ruby
            Motion](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/ruby-motion-dev/ "View all posts filed under Ruby Motion")
        -   [Ruby on
            Rails](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/platforms-languages/ruby-on-rails-dev/ "View all posts filed under Ruby on Rails")

    -   [The Software
        Life](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/software-life/ "View all posts filed under The Software Life")
        -   [Growing as
            Makers](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/software-life/growing-makers/ "View all posts filed under Growing as Makers")
        -   [Extracurricular
            Activities](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/software-life/extracurriculars/ "View all posts filed under Extracurricular Activities")
        -   [Evolving the
            Industry](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/software-life/software-industry/ "View all posts filed under Evolving the Industry")
        -   [Personal
            Optimization](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/software-life/personal-optimization/ "View all posts filed under Personal Optimization")

    -   [Miscellaneous](http://spin.atomicobject.com/category/miscellaneous/ "View all posts filed under Miscellaneous")

-   ### Stay Connected

    [![rss icon for atomic
    object](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/rss_icon.png)](http://spin.atomicobject.com/feed)
    [![twitter icon for atomic
    object](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/twitter_icon.png)](http://twitter.com/atomicobject)
    [![facebook icon for atomic
    object](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/fb_icon.png)](http://facebook.com/atomicobject)
    [![facebook icon for atomic
    object](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/flickr_icon.png)](http://flickr.com/atomicobject)

-   [![Great Not
    Big](http://d37rcl8t6g8sj5.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/great-not-big.jpg)](http://greatnotbig.com/?utm_source=spin&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=spin)
    Carl is the president and co-founder of [Atomic
    Object](http://www.atomicobject.com)

Copyright © [Atomic Object LLC.](http://www.atomicobject.com) — Grand
Rapids +1 616 776 6020 — Detroit +1 313 444 6010 — Ann Arbor +1 734 887
6020 — [Contact Us](http://www.atomicobject.com/pages/Contact+Us)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://spin.atomicobject.com/2014/09/03/visualizing-garbage-collection-algorithms/
