[![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0173e6a13b960d65c05bc6d2f7d9cfeb?s=224&d=monsterid&r=G)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/)

[thierry.nicola](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/ "thierry.nicola")

except linux, web stuff and music

Working with Grails, AngularJS, BackboneJS, ChaplinJS and
Coffee-/Java-Script.\
 My opinions and thoughts only. (and maybe yours or not) \
 [About](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/about) /
[Blog](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog)

-   [](https://github.com/littleiffel)
-   [](https://plus.google.com/+ThierryNicola)
-   [](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/feed/)
-   [](https://twitter.com/littleiffel)

[Follow me on App.net](https://alpha.app.net/littleiffel)

Powered by [Genesis](http://www.studiopress.com/)

You are here:
[Home](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/ "View Home") /
[angularjs](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/category/angularjs/ "View all items in angularjs")
/ Faster AngularJS Rendering (AngularJS and ReactJS)

Faster AngularJS Rendering (AngularJS and ReactJS)
==================================================

Estimated reading time: 16 minutes

April 19, 2014 by
[littleiffel](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/author/admin/) [10
Comments](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/#comments)
\

Have you used AngularJs and ran into some performance problems? Using
ReactJs rendering becomes much faster. A small examples explains how to
use ReactJs for rendering in AngularJs and a comparison is made between
native rendering and rendering using ReactJs.

I like [AngularJS](http://angularjs.org). I use it when I do some little
fun projects and I use it professionally in large Web apps. I tried
other frameworks as well, like [BackboneJS](http://backbonejs.org/) and
[EmberJS](http://emberjs.com/), which both are great tools as well. All
three of them belong to the class of MVC frameworks (or MVVC whatever
you want o call them). But whenever I used any of such a tool I always
ran and still run into the same problem: Rendering performance of lists
of items. Two way binding or one-way binding makes no real difference.
For me BackboneJS had better performance for rendering than AngularJS.
Lets put that on the back of two-way binding.

Now there is this great tool coming along called
[ReactJS](http://facebook.github.io/react/). And this little innocent
looking lib will definitely make one of the biggest changes in
JavaScript MVC frameworks for the last couple of months (if not years).
In short words, this library will make rendering finally fast. ReactJs
calls itself the V in MVC (the View). At first I was wondering, why the
hell would I want to drop the MC part? The MC part is where the fun is
in all these frameworks like EmberJs, BackboneJS and AngularJS, right?
After a closer look, you can actually see that ReactJs has quite some
features of the C (controller) part as well, but yet ReactJs is not a
full featured MVC framework and does not intend to be. The way ReactJs
works is to keep a virtual DOM and render only what actually changes
when the UI is updated?? Does that make sense, sounds new but so true.
Send command to update UI, React compares these changes to existing DOM
(using the Virtual DOM for ultra-fast diff) and React only updates what
is needed. The cool stuff is actually that the the diff of changes can
be performed very fast on the Virtual DOM. Facebook and Instagram have
developed ReactJs and are using it in production.

I listened to a [podcast](http://codewinds.com/podcast/004.html) with
[Pete Hunt](https://twitter.com/floydophone), dev of ReactJ, where this
guy talks about the intention of ReactJs. To resume in this place, but
be sure to listen to this podcast, the intentions behind open sourcing
ReactJs are make some noise in the V part of existing frameworks. And I
think that existing frameworks are going to adopt the same or similar
strategy for their UI part, or new libraries will come up that can be
used.

As ReactJs is the V it can be easily as V in existing frameworks already
today. [BackboneJS](http://www.andrewgreig.com/637/) ,
[more](http://joelburget.com/backbone-to-react/), with AngularJS,
[ngReact](http://davidandsuzi.com/ngreact-react-components-in-angular/)
or
[here](https://egghead.io/lessons/integrating-components-with-d3-and-angularjs).
Use it with
[Coffeescript](http://blog.vjeux.com/2013/javascript/react-coffeescript.html)?
So you can use ReactJs to render those parts of your App where some
performance comes in handy, for example ng-repeat with a few hundred
items. In a previous
[post](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2013/07/angularjs-my-solution-to-the-ng-repeat-performance-problem/),
I blogged how to make long lists ‘usable’ in AngularJs, but all these
[techniques](https://github.com/webux/ux-angularjs-datagrid) to make
“rendering” faster all rely on rendering only a part of the list. Using
ReactJs with AngularJs, your rendering time will drop by about 80%. I
played with ngReact and I experienced a performance increase that made
me think something was wrong. Rendering time dropped from about 4200ms
in native AngularJs to 120ms using ReactJs. Go check ngReact out to try
it yourself, or have a look at the plunkrs in this post.

I still experienced some issues when there are too many bindings in the
DOM with AngularJS, but this is another problem that is specific to
two-way binding. If you are too scared of this problem, you should
probably go with another framework than AngularJs. ReactJs just helps us
getting things as fast as possible on he screen of the user and here
ReactJs is making a great job.

I will show a small example on how to use ReactJs to render the view for
an Angular app. I installed [bower](http://bower.io/) and then

user@computer:$ mkdir fast-angular\
\
cd fast-angular\
\
bower install --save react\
\
bower install --save angular\
\

And then we are good to go. We only need ReactJs and AngularJs. We
create a simple html file with both scripts loaded:

~~~~ {.language-html}
<!doctype html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <title></title>
    <meta name="description" content="">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">

  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Fast AngularJs</h1> <h3>AngularJs with ReactJs</h3>


    <script src="bower_components/angular/angular.js"></script>
    <script src="bower_components/react/react.js"></script>

</body>
</html>
~~~~

What we are going to create is a small ReactJs component that renders
the string that we enter. So we use reactJs to render our model. We
create a component called MYAPP, that renders a props that is passed to
it. Then we create a traditional angularJs directive and controller (add
the tags to our html, to start the app). The directive instead of
rendering calls the ReactJs component and tells it to render. We use a
$watch on framework to re-render on update. From the ReactJs docs
calling createComponent when Component is already mounted updates the
existing instance. (using React Chrome Dev integration tools, I keep on
having the same instance ID, so I assume docs are true ) (See it live
here
[http://plnkr.co/edit/FXK3lU?p=info](http://plnkr.co/edit/FXK3lU?p=preview))

~~~~ {.language-html}
<!doctype html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <title></title>
    <meta name="description" content="">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">

  </head>
  <body ng-app="fasterAngular">
    <h1>Fast AngularJs</h1> <h3>AngularJs with ReactJs</h3>
    <div ng-controller="mycontroller">
        <input ng-model="framework"/>
        <hr>
        <fast-ng framework="framework"></fast-ng>
        <hr>
        Rendering with traditional AngularJs {{framework}}
    </div>

    <script src="bower_components/angular/angular.js"></script>
    <script src="bower_components/react/react.js"></script>
    <script >
        var MYAPP = React.createClass({
            displayName:'MYAPP',
            render:function(){
                return React.DOM.div(null, "Rendering faster in AngularJs with ", this.props.framework);

            }
        });
    </script>

    <script>
        angular.module('fasterAngular', []).
        controller('mycontroller', ['$scope', function($scope){
            $scope.framework = 'ReactJs';
 
        }]).directive('fastNg', function(){
            return{
                restrict:'E',
                scope:{
                    framework:'='
                },
                link:function(scope, el, attrs){
                    scope.$watch('framework', function(newValue, oldValue){
                        React.renderComponent(
                            MYAPP({framework:newValue}),
                            el[0]
                        );
                    })
                }
            }
        })
    </script>
</body>
</html>
~~~~

Of course this simple example does not make us gain some performance,
but It illustrates how we can use ReactJs to render our model. An other
example that shows the performance is the next one, where we render a
long list of numbers. The example is taken from the example of ngReact.
We generate an Array with 1500 data entries and render it in a table.
This is usually what brings some performance problems with native
ng-repeat in AngularJs. See this Plunkr for rendering using ReactJs
([http://plnkr.co/edit/ykYILa](http://plnkr.co/edit/ykYILa?p=preview))
and this one for native ngRepeat rendering
([http://plnkr.co/edit/YnF7Vn](http://plnkr.co/edit/YnF7Vn)). See code
here, rendering with ReactJs

~~~~ {.language-html}
<!doctype html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <title></title>
    <meta name="description" content="">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">

  </head>
  <body ng-app="fasterAngular">
    <h1>Fast AngularJs</h1> <h3>AngularJs with ReactJs</h3>
    <div ng-controller="mycontroller">

        <fast-repeat data="data"></fast-repeat>

    </div>

    <script src="bower_components/angular/angular.js"></script>
    <script src="bower_components/react/react.js"></script>

    <script >
        var MYLIST = React.createClass({displayName: 'MYLIST',
            render: function() {

              var data = this.props.data;

              var rows = data.map(function(datum) {
                var clickHandler = function(ev){
                    console.log("Still in reactJs");
                    console.log(ev);
                }

                return (
                  React.DOM.tr( {onClick:clickHandler},
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['0']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['1']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['2']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['3']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['4'])
                  )
                );
              });

              return (
                React.DOM.table(null,
                  rows
                )
              );
            }
        });
    </script>
    <script>
        angular.module('fasterAngular', []).
        controller('mycontroller', ['$scope', function($scope){
            $scope.framework = 'ReactJs';
            $scope.data = [];
            // Fill the data map with random data
            for(var i = 0; i < 1500; ++i) {
                $scope.data[i] = {};
                for(var j = 0; j < 5; ++j) {
                    $scope.data[i][j] = Math.random();
                }
            }
        }]).directive('fastRepeat', function(){
            return{
                restrict: 'E',
                scope:{
                    data: '='
                },
                link:function(scope, el, attrs){
                    scope.$watch('data', function(newValue, oldValue){
                        React.renderComponent(
                            MYLIST({data:newValue}),
                            el[0]
                        );
                    })
                }
            }
        })
    </script>
</body>
</html>
~~~~

A similar example where you can update the Data with a button Plunkr for
Native Angular
([http://plnkr.co/edit/YnF7Vn](http://plnkr.co/edit/YnF7Vn)) and using
ReactJs ([http://plnkr.co/edit/6zfFXU](http://plnkr.co/edit/6zfFXU))

~~~~ {.language-html}
<!doctype html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <title></title>
    <meta name="description" content="">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">

  </head>
  <body ng-app="fasterAngular">
    <h1>Fast AngularJs</h1> <h3>AngularJs with ReactJs</h3>
    <div ng-controller="mycontroller">
        <button ng-click="refresh()">Refresh Data</button>
        <fast-repeat data="data"></fast-repeat>
        <!-- <table>
          <tr ng-repeat="line in data" ng-click="clickHandler(ev)">
            <td>{{line[0]}}</td>
            <td>{{line[1]}}</td>
            <td>{{line[2]}}</td>
            <td>{{line[3]}}</td>
            <td>{{line[4]}}</td>
          </tr>
        </table> -->
    </div>

    <script src="bower_components/angular/angular.js"></script>
    <script src="bower_components/react/react.js"></script>

    <script >
        var MYLIST = React.createClass({displayName: 'MYLIST',
            render: function() {

              var data = this.props.data;

              var rows = data.map(function(datum) {
                var clickHandler = function(ev){
                    console.log("Still in reactJs");
                    console.log(ev);
                }

                return (
                  React.DOM.tr( {onClick:clickHandler},
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['0']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['1']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['2']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['3']),
                    React.DOM.td(null, datum['4'])
                  )
                );
              });

              return (
                React.DOM.table(null,
                  rows
                )
              );
            }
        });
    </script>
    <script>
        angular.module('fasterAngular', []).
        controller('mycontroller', ['$scope', function($scope){
            $scope.framework = 'ReactJs';
            $scope.data = [];
            // Fill the data map with random data

            $scope.clickHandler = function(){
                console.log("in AngularJS");
            }
            $scope.refresh = function(){
                for(var i = 0; i < 1500; ++i) {
                    $scope.data[i] = {};
                    for(var j = 0; j < 5; ++j) {
                        $scope.data[i][j] = Math.random();
                    }
                }
            }
            $scope.refresh()
        }]).directive('fastRepeat', function(){
            return{
                restrict: 'E',
                scope:{
                    data: '='
                },
                link:function(scope, el, attrs){
                    scope.$watchCollection('data', function(newValue, oldValue){
                        React.renderComponent(
                            MYLIST({data:newValue}),
                            el[0]
                        );
                    })
                }
            }
        })
    </script>
</body>
</html>
~~~~

To render 1500 rows, with AngularJS the time to render was about 1.35
seconds. When we let ReactJs do the rendering time was about 310ms. I
attached the timeline for both from Chrome Dev Tools

[![Rendering with ReactJs,
320ms](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/with-react-chromedev-300x40.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/with-react-chromedev.png)

Rendering with ReactJs, 320ms

[![Native AngularJs rendering
1200ms](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/native-angularjs-chromedev-300x71.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/native-angularjs-chromedev.png)

Native AngularJs rendering 1200ms

This is just a short introduction to use ReactJs with AngularJs. For
some parts of my next apps I will definitely use ReactJs to render parts
of it where I think that performance will be an issue. ReactJs, as said
by Pete Hunt, is quite a game changer and the intentions behind is to
show the general idea of its internal workings. I assume all major
frameworks will soon have a similar concept that will be used with them
or something to integrate easily. I like ReactJs and the idea behind to
use a virtual DOM for the diff makes perfect sense.

In a coming up post I will write about communication between ReactJs and
AngularJs, follow me on [twitter](https://twitter.com/littleiffel) to
stay tuned. I am just playing around…if you think I made some terrible
mistakes, ignore best practices, break stuff…etc please comment or write
me and I will happily learn and update this post.

UPDATE 21.04.2014 21:00 CET: This post was creating some discussions and
I got a bigger response than expected. Some people gave good feedback
and other ideas to explore. Others questioned the usefulness of
combining ReactJs with AngularJs. I try to explore the constructive
feedback given and leave the more subjective response to everyone to
figure it out. Find the discussion here:
[Hackernews](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7619824), and
[Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/r/angularjs/comments/23i9a9/faster_rendering_in_angularjs_with_reactjs/).

\* The argument that the loaf of another JS file does not value the
performance increase, did not maybe see that this performance helps
increasing responsiveness of the app and therefore increase usability.
And not only on initial call be on every update. For me I have been
spending ours to make WebApps react faster on user input. Webapps
already have a great difficulty to deal with ([300ms
delay](http://updates.html5rocks.com/2013/12/300ms-tap-delay-gone-away)).
For me I will to a reasonable amount always choose what helps usability.

\* The first hint was to use **track by $index** in the ng-repeat
directive (“…*With this association in place, AngularJS will not
$destroy and re-create DOM nodes unnecessarily. This can have a huge
performance and user experience benefit….*” read
[here](http://www.bennadel.com/blog/2556-using-track-by-with-ngrepeat-in-angularjs-1-2.htm)
about it, and official
[docs](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/directive/ngRepeat)) As far as
I understood track by $index, this will only render faster when DOM is
updated, but not on INITIAL rendering. So I tested again using the same
example as above, let the test run several times and found the following
results

1.  AngularJs + ReactJs:
    ([http://plnkr.co/edit/6zfFXU?p=preview](http://plnkr.co/edit/6zfFXU?p=preview))
    Initial loading: \~ 243ms, Updating: \~ 125ms
2.  AngularJS using Track By
    ([http://plnkr.co/edit/5FCsQO?p=preview](http://plnkr.co/edit/5FCsQO?p=preview))
    Initial loading: \~ 990ms, Updating: \~130ms
3.  AngularJs ngRepeat
    ([http://plnkr.co/edit/YnF7Vn?p=preview](http://plnkr.co/edit/YnF7Vn?p=preview))
    Initial loading: \~ 1100ms, Updating: 1150ms

So Track By $index does really have a huge impact when model is updated.
(jn plunkrs hit refresh button in HTML), but initial rendering is still
slow. I tried to run the tests several time and times may vary a little
but the trend never changed. See timelines here:

[![AngularJs with ReactJs
Updating](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-react-update-300x55.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-react-update.png)

AngularJs with ReactJs Updating

[![AngularJs with ReactJs Initial
Load](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-react-load-300x55.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-react-load.png)

AngularJs with ReactJs Initial Load

[![Straight AngularJs.
Updating](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-native-update-300x56.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-native-update.png)

Straight AngularJs. Updating

[![Straight AngularJs Initial
Load](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-native-load-300x55.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-native-load.png)

Straight AngularJs Initial Load

[![AngularJs using Track By.
Updating.](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-trackby-update-300x74.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-trackby-update.png)

AngularJs using Track By. Updating.

[![AngularJs using Track By Initial
Loading](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-trackby-load-300x55.png)](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/angularjs-trackby-load.png)

AngularJs using Track By Initial Loading

* * * * *

\* Virtual DOM in AngularJS: Ahmed pointed out in the comments ([down
here](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9369))
the point of view of AngularJS Team on Virtual DOM.
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srt3OBP2kGc\#t=118](%20http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srt3OBP2kGc#t=118)
As I think too, making the diff on a virtual DOM is what sooner or later
will be done by default either in Browsers or frameworks. As Pete Hunt
stated in the podcast linked above, that was the intentions of ReactJs’
Team

\* BindOnce? I don’t think that
[https://github.com/Pasvaz/bindonce](https://github.com/Pasvaz/bindonce)
has anything to do here with the performance of rendering. The
performance that is gained is a different one, when there are too many
bindings any updates becomes slow, scrolling is lagging..etc. Here it is
just writing and updating the DOM. Please comment me if you think I am
wrong, or provide examples.

\* Rendering using Mustache or Handlebars (In
[comments](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9370)):
I tried the plunkr and yes, rendering the DOM (initial and updating) is
fast. Initial load \~ 220ms and updating is even faster \~ **120ms**.
That is also impressive numbers. This is even faster than with ReactJs.
But I think that something goes lost here. In the examples there is
always a click handler on the rows that renders to the console. Is this
possible with Mustache or Handlebars? I am still working on an example
to get the communication between AngularJs and ReactJs going, and I
guess this is not possible with a template lib like Mustache or
Handlebars. But be assured **Mustache is rendering fast** and I will
keep it in mind for future work.

\* [Mithril](http://lhorie.github.io/mithril/), seems to be a new
framework on the market. I know I already came across the framework
once, but it seems to be rendering fast. Also using a virtual DOM.
Difficult to tell which direction this framework will take? But the
works seems interesting and I will check into the code to see what is so
different from ReactJs virtual Dom.

Looking forward to more feedback. AngularJs 2.0 is on the way and I
don’t know whtas coming, but I really appreciate the way the folks at
Google have chosen to develop the framework by including the community.

[Have you used AngularJs and ran into some performance problems? Using
ReactJs rendering becomes much faster. A small examples explains how to
use ReactJs for rendering in AngularJs and
a...](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/ " Faster AngularJS Rendering (AngularJS and ReactJS)")

Filed Under:
[angularjs](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/category/angularjs/ "View all posts in angularjs"),
[Programming](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/category/programming/ "View all posts in Programming")
Tagged With:
[angularjs](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/tag/angularjs/),
[performance](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/tag/performance/),
[reactjs](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/tag/reactjs/)

### Comments

1.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/952aaf0f2a0c14866996b11c058bb840?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)Karel
    Fučík says

    [April 22, 2014 at 11:12
    pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9404)

    Hi, really great post, thank you.

    I see no reason why virtual DOM should make such a big difference on
    initial rendering. I think it’s not in virtual DOM, it is just
    because React rendering is really fast.

    I’ve been developing my own framework that doesn’t use any “magic”
    such as virtual DOM or dirty checking, just events, getters and
    setters. I have recreated the example in my framework to see how it
    would compare – and it seems to be only about 1/4 slower than React
    in Chrome (probably because I use classes for models and collections
    instead of plain JS objects). You can see it here:

    [http://karf.cz/temp/dbperf/kff.html](http://karf.cz/temp/dbperf/kff.html)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9404#respond)

2.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d10002829ee3ef600680af6d6a8a3da5?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)Jorge
    says

    [April 21, 2014 at 2:15
    pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9371)

    You mention:

    “The way ReactJs works is to keep a virtual DOM and render only what
    actually changes when the UI is updated”

    But tracking the dependencies and updating only what needs to change
    is what KnockouJs has been doing for years
    ([http://knockoutjs.com/](http://knockoutjs.com/))

    I am assuming that I am missing something here… what is it?

    [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9371#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0173e6a13b960d65c05bc6d2f7d9cfeb?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)[littleiffel](https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnetGfufBRR4h2YQ-LB7yt1NTFoQrfkQ9U)
        says

        [April 21, 2014 at 9:37
        pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9375)

        Yes right Knockoutjs does that, but as far as I know not on a
        Virtual DOM. The interesting thing is to bring the performance
        of a Virtual DOM to a framework like AngularJs.

        Somebody posted about using ReactJs with BackboneJS
        [http://www.thomasboyt.com/2013/12/17/using-reactjs-as-a-backbone-view.html](http://www.thomasboyt.com/2013/12/17/using-reactjs-as-a-backbone-view.html)
        and I was just trying the same for AngularJs.

        [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9375#respond)

3.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/45fd6003f752b99d38d5e3541233cf5c?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)[Stephen](http://stephenn.com)
    says

    [April 21, 2014 at 1:27
    pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9370)

    I like to use Mustache.js for these cases. You don’t loose the
    templating, and its damn faster. Looks like its faster than react to
    me.

    [http://plnkr.co/edit/Slowpr?p=preview](http://plnkr.co/edit/Slowpr?p=preview)

    I also talked about this here.\

    [http://blog.stephenn.com/2014/03/javascript-apps-and-rendering-big-lists.html](http://blog.stephenn.com/2014/03/javascript-apps-and-rendering-big-lists.html)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9370#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0173e6a13b960d65c05bc6d2f7d9cfeb?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)[littleiffel](https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnetGfufBRR4h2YQ-LB7yt1NTFoQrfkQ9U)
        says

        [April 21, 2014 at 9:33
        pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9374)

        @Stephen\
         Thanks for your comment. I updated my post and checked
        rendering speed with Mustache. Is really fast.\
         But I think we loose the ability of binding? Example rendering
        data in an input field, would not be possible with Mustache,
        would it?

        [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9374#respond)

        -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/45fd6003f752b99d38d5e3541233cf5c?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)[Stephen](http://stephenn.com)
            says

            [April 22, 2014 at 3:36
            am](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9378)

            Your right. Theres no binding there. But for rending big
            static lists its great.

            [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9378#respond)

4.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d07152e7a01172f839077f56e33aa085?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)[Ahmet](http://narzac.me)
    says

    [April 21, 2014 at 8:56
    am](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9369)

    Thanks for the post. I think, you are right on the track,

    I would also recommend watching this
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srt3OBP2kGc\#t=118](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srt3OBP2kGc#t=118)
    if you haven’t done already. That is what angular team thinks on
    Virtual DOM.

    Also about the unnecessary bindings and $watch expressions(like in
    the case you render the server response and actually need to bust
    out, not watch for the rest of the lifespan of app), there is a
    great library
    [https://github.com/Pasvaz/bindonce](https://github.com/Pasvaz/bindonce)

    There is an active issue on bindonce to address ng-repeat issues one
    can encounter as you have described (unnecessary isolate scopes, in
    some use cases)\

    [https://github.com/Pasvaz/bindonce/issues/10](https://github.com/Pasvaz/bindonce/issues/10)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9369#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0173e6a13b960d65c05bc6d2f7d9cfeb?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)[littleiffel](https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnetGfufBRR4h2YQ-LB7yt1NTFoQrfkQ9U)
        says

        [April 21, 2014 at 9:32
        pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9373)

        @Ahmet\
         Thanks for the link to the youtube part of the Angular team. I
        missed that video somehow.\
         I know the bindonce, used it before. But in this case this does
        not really make a difference. I think (please correct me if
        wrong) the performance gained by bindonce is when there are too
        many bindings making the page unresponsive?

        [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9373#respond)

        -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ca95af3672dffda29ea5398dd8355879?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)rnreekez
            says

            [April 22, 2014 at 6:09
            pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9397)

            There is one additional scenario which would speak more
            directly to the work you’re doing and that’s the process of
            $scope.digest().

            Anything that has a watch associated with it will be
            processed during $scope.digest(), which occurs with every
            property update. By reducing the number of active watches,
            you’re also reducing the total time for digest which goes
            hand in hand with rendering time.

            [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9397#respond)

            -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0173e6a13b960d65c05bc6d2f7d9cfeb?s=112&d=monsterid&r=G)[littleiffel](https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnetGfufBRR4h2YQ-LB7yt1NTFoQrfkQ9U)
                says

                [April 22, 2014 at 7:58
                pm](http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/comment-page-1/#comment-9400)

                Hi sounds interesting, can you provide an example where
                the digest makes things render faster. Thanks

                [Reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/?replytocom=9400#respond)

### Leave a Reply [Cancel reply](/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/#respond)

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked \*

Name \*

Email \*

Website

Comment

You may use these HTML tags and attributes:
`<a href="" title=""> <abbr title=""> <acronym title=""> <b> <blockquote cite=""> <cite> <code> <del datetime=""> <em> <i> <q cite=""> <strike> <strong> <pre user="" computer="" escaped=""> `

Authenticate this comment using OpenID.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.williambrownstreet.net/blog/2014/04/faster-angularjs-rendering-angularjs-and-reactjs/
