[Charlie's Diary](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/)

Being the blog of Charles Stross, author, and occasional guests ...

[ [Home](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/) ] [
[FAQ](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/fiction/faq.html) ] [
[Contact me](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/who_am_i/foo.cgi) ] [
[Older stuff](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/old/index.html) ]

Back to: [New guest bloggers: Tricia Sullivan and Kameron
Hurley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/new-guest-bloggers-tricia-sull.html)
| Forward to: [Drink Me: The Horror Hotel Story, and Where Ideas Come
From](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/horror-hotel-story.html)

The referendum question

### By [Charlie Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

(*I've been under the weather due to a chest bug picked up in Dublin, so
haven't had time to write the lengthy article I promised a while ago.
Here's it's truncated summary version. Please* don't *bring up the
referendum debate in discussions under other blog posts, okay?*)

"Should Scotland be an independent country?"

I have a postal vote. I already voted "yes".

For what is probably an unusual reason ...

Forget all the short term arguments advanced by both sides about what
currency Scotland will use, about whether we'll be economically better
or worse off, the nature of post-independence Scottish defense policy,
whether we remain a monarchy or become a republic, what passport we'll
carry, and so on. That stuff is all short-term and will be resolved
within a generation.

No, seriously: 95% of the discussion in the referendum debates and on
the street has been about short term issues that can be resolved one way
or the other in the coming days and months (occasionally, months or
single-digit years). There's a remarkable amount of FUD—fear,
uncertainty, and doubt—flying around. Many folks seem to think that if
Scotland opts for independence on September 18th then on the 19th
they'll be stripped of their existing British citizenship, armed border
checkpoints will show up on the M76 and A1, and the Queen will be given
the boot by the end of the month. (Needless to say, none of this is
going to happen.)

In making my mind up, I looked at the long term prospects.

In the long term I favour a Europe—indeed, a world—of much smaller
states. I don't just favour breaking up the UK; I favour breaking up the
United States, India, and China. *Break up the [Westphalian
system](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westphalian_sovereignty)*. We live
today in a world dominated by two types of group entity; the
nation-states with defined borders and treaty obligations that emerged
after the end of the 30 Years War, and the transnational corporate
entities which thrive atop the free trade framework provided by the
treaty organizations binding those Westphalian states together.

I believe the Westphalian nation-state system isn't simply showing its
age: it's creaking at the seams and teetering on the edge of
catastrophic breakdown. The world today is *far smaller* than the world
of 1648; the entire planet, in travel terms, is shrunk to the size of
the English home counties. In 1648 to travel from the south of Scotland
(from, say, Berwick-upon-Tweed, the debatable walled border city) to the
far north-west would take, at a minimum, a couple of weeks by sea; to
travel that distance by land was a harsh journey of hundreds of miles
across mountains and bogs and through still-forested glens, on foot or
horseback. Today it's a couple of noisy hours on board a turboprop
airliner. Distance has collapsed under us. To some extent the definition
of the Westphalian state as being able to control its own internal
territory was a side-effect of distance: a foreign army couldn't rapidly
and easily penetrate the inner lands of a state without fear of
retaliation. (Tell that to the residents of the [tribal provinces in
Pakistan](http://drones.pitchinteractive.com/).)

Moreover, our nations today have not only undergone a strange
geographical implosion since the 17th century: they have *exploded* in
population terms. The [population of the American Colonies in
1790](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographic_history_of_the_United_States#Population_in_1790)
is estimated at roughly 2.7 million; the United States today has over
300 million inhabitants. In 1780 England and Wales had around 7.5
million inhabitants; they're now at 57 million. So we have a 1-2 order
of magnitude increase in population and a 2-3 order of magnitude
decrease in travel time ... and possibly a 3-5 order of magnitude
decrease in communications latency.

Today we're seeing the fallout from this problem everywhere. Westphalian
states can't, for the most part, control their own territory to the
extent of keeping intruders out; just look at the ghastly situation in
Ukraine right now. Non-state actors play an increasingly huge role in
dictating our economic conditions. And it seems to me that something
goes badly wrong with representative democracy in polities that grow
beyond somewhere in the range 5-15 million people; direct accountability
vanishes and we end up with what I've termed [the beige
dictatorship](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html).
Beige isn't the worst colour&dash;some of the non-beige contenders are
[distinctly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigel_Farage)
[alarming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marine_Le_Pen)—but their popular
appeal is a symptom of an institutional failure, a representational
deficit: many voters feel so alienated by the beige that they'll vote
for the brownshirts.

My feeling is that we'd be better served by a group of *much* smaller
nations working in a loose confederation or treaty structure. Their job
should be to handle local issues (yes, this is localism) while
compartmentalizing failure modes: the failure modes of a gigantic
imperial power are almost always far worse than those of a smaller
nation (compare the disintegration of the Soviet Union with that of
Czecheslovakia). Rather than large monolithic states run by people at
the top who are so remote from their constituents that they set policy
to please lobbyists rather than their electors, I'd prefer to see treaty
organizations like NATO and the EU emerging at consensus after
discussions among numerous smaller stakeholder entities, where
representatives are actually accountable to their electors. (Call me a
utopian, if you will.)

Yes, this is also an argument for Wales, the North of England, and
London itself all becoming independent nations. But they aren't on the
ballot. So Scottish independence is a starting point.

One final note: what about left-internationalism? Isn't nationalism the
enemy of the working class? (And to the extent that all of us who aren't
in the 0.1% are "working class"—if you have to work to earn a living,
you're working class, even if you're a brain surgeon or an
accountant—the enemy of all of us?) Well yes: but the kind of
nationalism that brought us the Great European War (for the Second World
War may best be viewed with the perspective of long-term history as
simply a flare-up of the war that began in 1914, after the combatants
time out to breed a new generation of cannon-fodder) is pretty much
dead. As dead as the Westphalian states that had territorial integrity
they could defend, because getting from one to the other still took days
or weeks by railway or steam ship, and invading another from the one
took days or weeks of marching infantry divisions. Nor is the working
"class" still obviously an entity you can point at, with which people
share a strong sense of solidarity: where is the solidarity between
lawyer and street-sweeper, nursing home care worker and robot designer?
Yes, capitalism and the crisis of capitalism is still with us: but the
continuing and ongoing recomplication of the world around us makes the
traditional movement of masses one of questionable relevance. We need
better structures, it's true. But I don't see them emerging from the
kind of monolithic, territorially hegemonic state that thinks its place
in the world is best secured by building bigger aircraft carriers.
Firepower doesn't build external stability, as the past decade in Iraq
demonstrates beyond a shadow of a doubt. We need consensus, and we need
a finer granularity of constitutional decision making. Hence smaller
nation-states.

Posted by [Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
at 11:58 on September 8, 2014 | [Comments
(137)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comments "137 Comments")

137 Comments
------------

| [Leave a comment](#comments-open)

[![Princejvstin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1602)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Princejvstin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1602)
| [September 8, 2014
13:03](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958280)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**1:**

"I favour breaking up the United States, India, and China. Break up the
Westphalian system."

Side note of amusement. I have a character, a NPC in one of my games, a
demigod, whose name is Flavius Marcus Westphalius. He's the demigod of
treaties, who made his bones with the Treaty of Westphalia.

He'd not be amused by your suggestion one bit. ;)

But, seriously, are you right about it being good for the world?...I do
think a new system is needed, because that system has strained under the
rise of transnational corporations and the impracticality of 17th
century politics being played out today again and again.

[![gasdive](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4107)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[gasdive](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4107)
| [September 8, 2014
13:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958281)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**2:**

Does it even make sense to have nations based on physical location?
Could nations and their services be abstracted from the physical layer?
Some sort of online presence that provides the services of the physical
(garbage collection, fire putting out) without an nation tied to a
substrate of islands and territories? I don't know, I don't have a model
of that in my head. However I feel that I belong in a sense of
nationhood of shared values with SF readers than I do with the guy next
door who yells at the TV to encourage his sports team to greater heights
of corporate advertising.

[![gasdive](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4107)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[gasdive](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4107)
| [September 8, 2014
13:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958282)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**3:**

PS, if we could abstract the physical layer, could I get dual
citizenship with both the SF and the Linux communities? The Linux
community seems very helpful and friendly. (by and large)

[![Pete
Jordan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2075)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](https://outersquid.tumblr.com/)
[Pete
Jordan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2075)
| [September 8, 2014
13:37](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958283)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**4:**

You make no comment, past your introduction, of the "transnational
corporate entities"; do you see any non-catastrophic resolution of the
relationship between them and your, essentially syndicalist, replacement
for nation states?

[![Ian
S](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2989)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Ian
S](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2989) |
[September 8, 2014
13:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958284)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**5:**

Two things Charlie, first the disagreement, then the agreement.

For the first; I don't think you can ignore the short and medium term.
If they have a deep and yawning chasm in them, then no matter what you
might wish/think the future will hold, you would be insane to try and
jump them based on hope.

And thanks to the crassly poor (public) planning of the SNP - hope is
all there is, because the evidence is all against it. It's not FUD; it's
cold hard facts - that are unpalatable to some Braveheart fixated fools.

I say public because there is always the possibility that the SNP aren't
as ill prepared in private - which is worse since their solutions to the
intractable problems would have to be so unpalatable they dare not tell
the voters in advance.

Either way, no sane person should be voting yes (and that's without even
getting to the suspicious desire of Cameron for a do or die vote).

On the agreement side - yep, the nation state has distinct problems. It
should be remembered that the larger nation state was an imposition on
top of the city state as reach grew and it was tractable to have such a
beast in more than just name. You could project your will over those
kinds of distances, and you could bring the peasants under your tax
banner at a distance as well.

Today, as you say, we are at a global scale. Communication and reach is
such that the US can kidnap and tax around the world - not a nice
prospect, but an accurate one. And as you also say, it doesn't really
work as a democracy - since accountability is shot and the voting system
usurped.

However, I would say that the solution is not smaller nation states, but
an end to the fundamental idea of the nation as mother and father
entirely. Already I have more in common (and more contact) with people
around the world than I do with someone next door. The natural groups
are by outlook, education, and other allegiances - not geography.

So view the local nation transitioned to the equivalent of the local
council - emptying the bins, keeping the potholes filled; but with the
other aspects, the national aspects, delivered by the group you owe
allegiance to on a supra national basis.

And bringing it back to the beginning, getting there from here is
difficult with difficult paths to be navigated - but I would suggest
more possible than scotland not getting reamed in the great nation state
game that Cameron and the EU have scoped out.

[![Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)
| [September 8, 2014
13:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958285)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**6:**

I agree with pretty much all of this. Well done Charlie, both for your
vote and also explaining your reasons. I live in the deep south (Sussex
that is), but if I had the vote to break up the UK, even to the extent
as you suggest as splitting the north, south, and London (and I live in
Sussex, but was born in London - what kind of 'passport' would I have,
and what would a 'passport' mean in such a world?). The same goes for
the rest of Europe, the rest of the world. It's a view that is
remarkably similar to Noam Chomsky's view of how things should be (as
compiled in a book of his writings), that is living in 'anarchic'
states/regions, with powers devolved down to committees/co-ops
representing regions as appropriate (local issues to a local
co-op/board/parliament, national issues to the national equiv). So not
anarchy as portrayed by the mainstream - lawlessness - more like
ultimate-devolution.

[![UngainlyTitan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1286)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[UngainlyTitan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1286)
| [September 8, 2014
13:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958286)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**7:**

Largely agree with you analysis Charlie, but speaking as one who lives
in a small nation, Ireland, most of irelands problems (IMHO) stem from
being so small that pretty much everyone knows everyone else. With out
the EU and stuff like the European Convention on Human Rights and EU
labour and Environmental regulations a lot of things that should have
been done anyway would still be delayed by people unwilling to push
through reforms because it would upset people that they know well.\

[![Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)
| [September 8, 2014
14:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958289)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**8:**

While generally in agreement with Charlie here (Being Danish and
therefore from a Charlie-approved-size nation-state) my worry is that a
gaggle of small countries will not be able to stand up to our corporate
overlords.

We saw it for instance with the OOXML thing, where Microsoft bought the
necessary number of cheap/small nations to get the ISO vote the way they
wanted.

Charlies proposal probably needs a clause to limit the size of $BIGCORP
as well.

[![Philip
Ebersole](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4680)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://philebersole.wordpress.com)
[Philip
Ebersole](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4680)
| [September 8, 2014
14:09](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958290)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**9:**

The increase in population is an argument for smaller nations and
states. The decrease in travel time and communications time is an
argument for the need of larger supra-national entities.

Smaller nations and states are a means of preserving cultural and
political diversity, and making governments more responsive to the
people.

The problem with smaller nations and states is that they are have a hard
time defending themselves against larger nations and large corporations.

Here in the USA, large corporations can get pretty much anything they
want from state governments by threatening to pull up stakes and move to
another state. To some extent, they can do the same thing to the
national government by threatening to move overseas.

The solution, I suppose, is to have smaller nation-states and more
powerful international organizations. The problem with that, at least in
the short term, is that all the existing international organizations -
the IMF, WTO, etc. - exercise quasi-governmental powers, but on behalf
of global banks and corporations.\

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from Pete
Jordan](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958283)
| [September 8, 2014
14:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958291)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**10:**

*do you see any non-catastrophic resolution of the relationship between
them and your, essentially syndicalist, replacement for nation states?*

That's a *very* hard question. (See also [Invaders from
Mars](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2010/12/invaders-from-mars.html).)
But I will note that in some ways they've already seceded from the
nation-states within which they originated; [for
example](http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/news/article-2586977/Treasury-targets-Amazon-Apple-Google-tax-avoidance.html)
by funnelling their profits through extraterritorial tax havens and
loading down their profitable subsidiaries with "intellectual property"
royalty payments for using their own branding (which get paid to
tax-free offshore subsidiaries -- thank you, Starbucks, for showing us
how it's done!). *The stable door is already smashed off its hinges:*
maintaining the status quo is not a good option.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
UngainlyTitan](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958286)
| [September 8, 2014
14:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958292)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**11:**

Ireland has ... peculiar ... problems of its own. In particular, Ireland
currently is at around 1.1% population growth, in stage 3/4 demographic
transition; but I have the distinct impression that [Ireland remained
stuck in stage 2 until the
mid-1980s](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographic_transition); so, big
families, lots of siblings and cousins, which in turn means *everyone*
is a friend of your brother/sisters/cousins/aunts/uncles. Hence the
incestuous nature of political horse-trading there (building on top of
the post-1920s fallout, which left a lot of buried bodies and a lot of
questions that nobody wants to ask).

Scotland and the UK in general did the stage 3/4 shift at least a
generation earlier and so have had more time to stabilize, with sparser
families and more groupings based on voluntary association -- a more
"atomized" society, in other words, which may paradoxically be better at
adapting to change (people are less worried about changes upsetting
their first cousin's apple cart).

[![Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)
| [September 8, 2014
14:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958293)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**12:**

P.S on a side-note (and completely off-topic), I have just got to the
part in Hannu Rajaniemi's latest book where there is a spaceship named
Bob Howard?! Coincidence , flattery, or an in-joke? I'm guessing not a
coincidence - I only ever bought Hannu's first novel due to your glowing
praise on the front cover :-D

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Ant](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958293)
| [September 8, 2014
14:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958294)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**13:**

Hannu and I are sometime fiction workshop-mates going back many years;
we regularly meet up for coffee and/or beer. (He's in the process of
moving to California, so maybe there'll be less of that in the next few
years ....)

[![Chris
Gerrib](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4684)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://chris-gerrib.livejournal.com)
[Chris
Gerrib](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4684)
| [September 8, 2014
14:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958295)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**14:**

Speaking as an American, the idea that smaller governments are better
doesn't entirely work for me. We have 50 smaller governments (the
states) and many of them (including Illinois, my home sod) are rife with
corruption and idiocy.

[![JamesPalmer](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4683)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[JamesPalmer](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4683)
| [September 8, 2014
14:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958296)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**15:**

"The predictable and localized consequences of this massive and
disruptive policy shift should be ignored, since the long-term
supposedly favors my abstract theory of governance" is not a terribly
reassuring viewpoint.

Not to mention that the Scottish economic vision put forward by Salmond
is highly favorable to corporate power - a slashed business tax to
undercut the UK (along Irish lines, and that worked out wonderfully),
backing Murdoch's media expansionism, etc.

[![a cynic
writes...](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4678)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[a cynic
writes...](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4678)
| [September 8, 2014
14:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958297)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**16:**

I was with you (if not necessarily in agreement) up until that
definition of "working class" which expanded the scope to the point it
was meaningless.

I always used to find it laughable when the professional seat warmers on
Question Time used a similar definition when describing themselves.

I'd contrast their definition of hard work ("going to lots of meetings
and drinking tea") with my Dad's ("crawling under large industrial
machines through pools of oil and swarf, to diagnose and repair faults
by touch") and somehow they didn't seem comparable.

Despite what you might think solidarity exists - but it's between the
street-sweeper and the nursing home care worker. Trouble is since we're
all middl\^h\^h\^h\^h\^h working class now they've few places to express
it politically.

[![Rex
Gatch](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4681)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c)
[Rex
Gatch](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c")
| [September 8, 2014
14:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958298)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**17:**

I was fascinated, Charlie by your rationale for your Yes vote. I had
assumed other reasons would have been behind it, more fool me.\
 I absolutely agree that it's the strongest argument for a Yes vote.
There is no doubt in my mind that smaller entities create the conditions
for more focused, responsive and engaged populations.\
 I recently reread the Nano Flower by Peter Hamilton (the final book in
the Greg Mandel trilogy) where one of the main protagonists makes the
same argument powerfully, for Wales rather than Scotland in that
instance.\
 Still, as you say, you really need to to be taking a long term view.
Paul Krugman in the NYT today points out some of the short term hurdles
quite forcefully.\
 Anyway, the results will be fascinating, though a narrow No vote
followed by everyone sitting around the table like grown ups and looking
at a federal structure for the UK, might achieve most of what everyone
wants without the short term disruptions.

[![Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4685)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b)
[Andrew
Gray](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b")
| [September 8, 2014
14:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958299)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**18:**

So basically you'd like something like Switzerland but on a global
scale?

[![JamesPalmer](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4683)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[JamesPalmer](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4683)
| [September 8, 2014
14:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958300)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**19:**

Small states, even in federalized systems, tend to either the highly
functional and communal, in places where social democracy was in place
early and a relative egalitarianism developed (e.g. Holland, Denmark) or
highly corrupt, in places where elites emerged rapidly and
nepotism/tribalism became the norm (e.g. Ireland, Portugal, a huge
swathe of the US). Scotland, which is in inequality only fractionally
behind the rUK at this point, looks a lot more likely to fall into the
second category.

[![Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4685)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b)
[Andrew
Gray](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b")
replied to [this comment from Chris
Gerrib](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958295)
| [September 8, 2014
14:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958301)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**20:**

As an American as well, I feel the opposite. Better to have localized
corruption that is easier to address on a small scale than serious
corruption in a distant and all powerful national government.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from Chris
Gerrib](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958295)
| [September 8, 2014
14:39](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958302)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**21:**

With all due respect, the US States are not governments; they're
regional/municipal administrations -- they can't set the terms of their
relationships with other states (not since 1865, anyway) and so a *very*
interesting leverage situation ensued, circa 1865-1895, that allowed
inter-state interests to trade off leverage within individual states
against leverage at federal level to deliver a framework favourable to
(ahem) oligarchic trusts. Partially dismantled during the New Deal,
subsequently reconstructed under and after Reagan's presidency (largely
by the post-1994 Republican congress).

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
JamesPalmer](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958296)
| [September 8, 2014
14:40](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958303)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**22:**

A retrospective analysis of just what happened when Salmond met Donald
Trump might be instructive on this point. (TL:DR; Trump got his ass
handed to him on a silver platter. With a knife and fork.)

[![Rex
Gatch](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4681)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c)
[Rex
Gatch](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c")
replied to [this comment from Chris
Gerrib](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958295)
| [September 8, 2014
14:40](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958304)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**23:**

As a resident of New Jersey I have huge sympathies for your position.
The legacy of\
 Machine politics and gerrymandering doesn't map very neatly to the UK.
Smaller, nimbler and responsive units create the conditions for a more
engaged and effective government.\
 Sadly, creating the conditions for that does not guarantee such an
outcome.

[![Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4685)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b)
[Andrew
Gray](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b")
| [September 8, 2014
14:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958305)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**24:**

It seems like the EU creates a framework that allows for small nation
states to split off from the large ones that formed in the past few
centuries. Though I'm looking in from the outside, a trend toward
breaking up the large nations into ones under 10 million people seems
likely.

Africa and Asia would probably go the same route if they had something
like the EU.

The Americas (North and South) are a bit different though. There are
some areas that could still split off, but by and large we're
underpopulated for our land area and have fairly homogeneous culture.
The US splitting up becomes less and less likely, because there is less
and less geographic distinction between the various groups. People in
Georgia an people in New York are more similar today that they were in
1914 or 1814. There might be a few places that could go independent.
Some of the Native American reservations, a few coastal areas.

What might make more sense in the US is breaking up some of the large
states. California, Texas, New York, Florida, etc. Bumping the number of
states up to 60 would increase local representation and control.

[![Pete
Jordan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2075)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](https://outersquid.tumblr.com/)
[Pete
Jordan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2075)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958291)
| [September 8, 2014
14:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958306)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**25:**

Indeed: virtually all nation states are already less powerful and
influential than the largest corporations; splitting states into smaller
entities will hardly change that (pace Poul-Henning Kamp's comment
above).

The only practicable control I can see is in larger federal entities,
like the EU or beyond that the UN, but the existing structural and
organisational issues that bedevil such aren't going to go away. Even
the multi-level delegation systems of Anarcho-syndicalism are open to
subversion and corruption; representative organisations are worse. how
do you stop people and organisations being bought?

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from a cynic
writes...](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958297)
| [September 8, 2014
14:46](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958307)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**26:**

*Despite what you might think solidarity exists - but it's between the
street-sweeper and the nursing home care worker. Trouble is since we're
all middl\^h\^h\^h\^h\^h working class now they've few places to express
it politically.*

Yup. See also "New Labour". Oh, my bad: New Labour are *intensely
comfortable* with massive accumulations of wealth (thank you, Lord
Mandelson of Darkness, for spilling the beans in public).

Look, either you sell your labour on the market, or you don't: if you
don't and you're not lumpenproletariat you probably have a capital
accumulation that allows you to buy assets and charge rent on them.
Thereby, capital accumulates more capital. The capital accumulating
class is vanishingly tiny compared to the rest of us, and that's the key
distinction: do you work, or not?

Yes, I will grant you there's a social definition of "working class"
that's left over from an earlier age. But the pattern of the 21st
century is that the mass middle class (forged during the
social-democratic era of the late 1930s to late 1970s) is being
systematically de-stabilized and pushed down into the mass of the
fungible labour force. The consequences of this shift, combined with
automation finally beginning to eat into
managerial/technical/mind-worker jobs, is going to be seismic. And
that's what I'm getting at: the old definitions are not useful any more.

[![Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)
replied to [this comment from Rex
Gatch](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958298)
| [September 8, 2014
14:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958308)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**27:**

The Greg Mandel trilogy is good, with some very interesting political
views, very conservative in many ways, yet with very liberal aspects.
Re-read them recently, and found the tech quite prescient in some ways -
everyone has stuff exactly like smartphones, only called something
completely different. I forget what he called them, but I remember
thinking it sounded better than 'smart phone' which sounds like the kind
of dumb, dumbed-down, name Douglas Adams gave to all the tech in HHGTTG
\^\_\^

[![R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4686)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4686)
| [September 8, 2014
14:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958309)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**28:**

I can see the argument, but... as a brown-skinned American the idea that
individual American states wield more power is kind of terrifying, since
the Federal government is basically the only thing keeping many of them
from going full Jefferson Davis. (e.g. the almost immediate changes some
US southern states made to disenfranchise voters in the wake of the US
Supreme Court's partial dismantling of the Voting Rights Act.) I'll
concede that the idea of smaller states might work better in areas where
there isn't a history of "state's rights (to enforce chattel slavery)."
YMMV

[![Kevin
Murray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4682)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Kevin
Murray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4682)
replied to [this comment from Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958289)
| [September 8, 2014
14:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958311)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**29:**

I agree with your comment about limiting the size of corporations, or
something like that.

I feel that a lot of what use to be political power (of the people) has
been slowly passed over to large international corporations, a
reasonable number of who behave in a way that if they were ordinary
citizens would result in complaints about the load they were placing on
the legal and prison systems. I'm not sure if this is a cause or a
consequence of the "beige dictatorship".

It seems to me (i.e. I'm probably wrong) that the smaller the country
the less able that country is to protect and defend its population
against coporations that don't pull their weight and behave "helpfully".
And you won't get international agreement on controlling that,
regardless of who you are as too many countries (both large and small)
see the status quo as best for them (or that's what their lobbyists
say).

I'm an expat Scot without a vote, but I still don't know which way I'd
vote even if I could: because both sides have good points. I agree with
Charlie about the short-term stupidity of the argument at the moment
(worried about the pension if you leave the pound? perhaps you should be
equally worried about the pension if you don't leave the pound!), and
neither Charlies post, or Ken Macleod's video have helped sway me to one
or the other.

What I'm more worried about is what this vote will do, whatever the
result is, to Scotland. From the outside, it could trigger some bitter
splits: sadly Scotland is not without the ability to have schisms.
However, if could (again regardless of which way the vote goes), really
strengthen the idea of being Scottish. I'm hoping for the latter,
regardless of the vote outcome, and that I'll be able to get a Scottish
passport if the vote does go yes.\

[![Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4685)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b)
[Andrew
Gray](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b")
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958302)
| [September 8, 2014
14:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958312)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**30:**

The thing with politics in the US is that people are pro-state's rights
when their view is unpopular on a national level, and pro-national
legislation when their view is unpopular in their state.

We also have the side issue that the idea of state's rights became
associated with racism due to state-level opposition to civil rights in
the 60s. Though that seems to be fading, as things like legalizing drugs
and increasing environmental standards become more of a state-level
issue.

I'd like to see a weaker US federal government and stronger state
governments. Though perhaps not to the pre-1865 level of state
governments were the Constitution didn't apply to them.

[![Rex
Gatch](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4681)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c)
[Rex
Gatch](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b8d06558b9970c")
replied to [this comment from
Ant](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958308)
| [September 8, 2014
15:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958313)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**31:**

cybofaxes, and yes they were very prescient. naming can be weird,
Charlie had an issue with Bitcoin (and al Qaeda) going huge after he
used them as obscure terms, so did William Gibson with Microsofts from
Neuromancer.

[![Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4685)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b)
[Andrew
Gray](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b")
replied to [this comment from R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958309)
| [September 8, 2014
15:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958314)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**32:**

That might have been true in the past, but not any more.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958309)
| [September 8, 2014
15:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958315)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**33:**

I'd be a lot happier seeing California split into four states (with
additional senate/congress representation) than seeing Mississippi going
it alone as a national government, yes. But in general, smaller failed
nations cause smaller problems for everyone else (outside them). If the
USA fails as a nation the global consequences would be far worse than
if, say, the Christianist Dominion of Alabama fails as a nation.
(Although this is scant comfort if you're stuck in the CDA without a
passport when everything goes to hell in a handbasket ...)

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
| [September 8, 2014
15:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958316)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**34:**

Personally, I'm more concerned abuot things like Scamoron's plans for
the NHS, and Clueless George generally, than about whet might happen to
the value of my pension pot in real terms in the next decade.

[![Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Ant](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2909)
replied to [this comment from Rex
Gatch](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958313)
| [September 8, 2014
15:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958317)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**35:**

Oh yes, Neuromancer had all sorts of crazy dissonances! It was (AFAIK)
the first book to mention cyberspace, but everyone still used phone
boxes!

Which books by Charlie had bitcoin in? Either I haven't read it/them,
else the use slipped past me (maybe I read them a while ago, maybe I was
already familiar enough with BTC to not notice it any more that I'd
notice EUR)...

[![R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4686)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4686)
replied to [this comment from Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958314)
| [September 8, 2014
15:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958318)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**36:**

Well, yeah - Ferguson, Missouri is an example of how local governments
in the US are not like that anymore. OTOH, it's also evidence for the
proposition that smaller failed states cause smaller problems for people
outside of them.

[![John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)
replied to [this comment from
gasdive](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958281)
| [September 8, 2014
15:49](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958319)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**37:**

"Could nations and their services be abstracted from the physical
layer?"

Yes, they are called multinational corporations, and they don't
particularly like you.

[![Ian
Bertram](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2603)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/ibanda)
[Ian
Bertram](http://profile.typekey.com/ibanda "http://profile.typekey.com/ibanda")
| [September 8, 2014
15:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958320)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**38:**

"I favour breaking up the United States, India, and China. Break up the
Westphalian system."

Its worth reading some of the discussions that took place around Irish
Home Rule. 'Home Rule All Round', federalism, break up of England into
smaller units were all considered.

I've been working (for too long...) on an alt history starting just pre
WW1 which uses some of those ideas for a PoD during the period known as
'The Great Unrest.'

There are lots of references in the bibliography posted on Dropbox here:
[https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/47807417/bibliography%20for%20frozen%20spring%20TL.doc](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/47807417/bibliography%20for%20frozen%20spring%20TL.doc)

but I would especially recommend this:\
 *Ireland and the Federal Solution: The debate over the United Kingdom
Constitution, 1870-1921, John Kendle, McGill-Queen's University Press,
1989*

[![R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4686)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4686)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958315)
| [September 8, 2014
15:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958321)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**39:**

I agree (well, maybe not with the California thing, which always seemed
like Lex Luthor's plan from the first Superman movie - how come nobody
ever wants to break up Texas?). I like the idea of smaller states to
improve RAS and latency, and I can see how it could be a good idea for
Scotland, but I can't see it happening in the US in the near-term
without creating one of the problems it's intended to solve (bad failure
mode for large nation state gets on everybody). Also, I'm happy on my
local maxima since it's surrounded by deep valleys in which armed
militias go door-to-door shooting brown people. Maybe in a few decades
this won't be true anymore.

[![Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4685)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b)
[Andrew
Gray](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b")
replied to [this comment from John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958319)
| [September 8, 2014
15:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958322)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**40:**

There's also the Ottoman millet system that can be used as a historic
example of nations being divorced from physical location. Though it was
primarily religiously based.

[![John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)
replied to [this comment from R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958318)
| [September 8, 2014
15:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958323)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**41:**

I would argue that size is mostly (not entirely) irrelevant, and, that
in fact, petty authoritarianism is harder to root out than in a larger
state. Ferguson is a classic example where local government creates the
majority of its revenue f predation upon the poor, and has a much easier
time of control through surveillance of a smaller population. Other
examples of failed states where size isn't of prime importance: Somalia,
Afghanistan, North Korea, Kansas.

Smaller states are more easily preyed upon by large multinational
corporations. In fact, large multinational corporations are themselves
small states that are not particularly successful at existential
survival.\

[![a cynic
writes...](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4678)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[a cynic
writes...](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4678)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958307)
| [September 8, 2014
16:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958324)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**42:**

I think we part company on the Road to Wigan Pier, Charlie.

\

[![inaimathi](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4691)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://langnostic.inaimathi.ca/)
[inaimathi](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4691)
replied to [this comment from
Ant](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958317)
| [September 8, 2014
16:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958325)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**43:**

Neptune's Brood. There was some discussion about it in the recent
crib-sheet comments.

[http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/crib-sheet-neptunes-brood.html](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/crib-sheet-neptunes-brood.html)

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Ant](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958317)
| [September 8, 2014
16:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958326)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**44:**

Neptune's Brood. (See Crib Notes blog entry from last week.)

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958321)
| [September 8, 2014
16:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958327)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**45:**

*how come nobody ever wants to break up Texas?).*\
 Because it's much more fun to divide Alaska in half, and make Texas the
**third** largest state in the Union?

And as I type this, the radio plays "Anchoridge" by Michelle Shocked.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
| [September 8, 2014
16:16](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958329)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**46:**

I agree, I think, that the endpoint is desirable.

I could see an argument for a world-state with a decent federation
structure so there's something big enough to actually regulate the
effectively mega-corps. The trouble is, I'm not sure we've seen a
federal state structure (such as the founding fathers' presumed dream of
the USA), at least not on a scale bigger than Germany, and I'm not sure
it will really work with human nature.

So, given that, let's say smallish quasi-nation states in treaty-bound
confederations is the best solution. Looking at the news from East
Ukraine and Putin, at the myriad ways the various despots in the Middle
East are clinging to power and the like... the process of moving from
here to their seems really, really scary and fully of failure states
that involve lots of people dying.

And as a gay woman I don't much fancy going to large parts of the USA
right now. If the USA splits up into separate countries - well I won't
go to the Republic of Texas for one. The current legislature with the
Supreme Court to try and keep them in line approves of them carrying
guns in, but won't let them use correct medical language 'for fear of
shocking members,' seems to think tampons are obscene, and... I could
keep on listing things. While the people in many states are moving to a
more sensible position on women's rights and gay rights, their
legislatures are dragging about 2 centuries behind the rest of the
developed world. Texas is just the one that's crossed my reading most
recently with the most egregious and memorable examples, there would be
others. But the list gets boring and the point should be clear enough.

As other commentators in this list are pointing out, it's not only on
this issue but we each have our hot topics.

As I've commented elsewhere on this topic (on this blog), I'd like to
see a federalised UK. Regional governments and a sort of senate
replacing the House of Lords. A smaller step to your long term goal.

But thanks for sharing your thoughts. Very different to all the coverage
we're hearing down here in rUK (and I suspect to up in Scotland).

On a more positive note, what is a good size for your ideal state?
Should there be a process for states undergoing fission built in to
their constitutions in your ideal future?

[![Joshua
Ellis](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4689)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.zenarchery.com)
[Joshua
Ellis](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4689)
| [September 8, 2014
16:16](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958330)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**47:**

An odd fact that's not widely known, that I was taught in my Texas
history class, growing up around Dallas: Texas is the only state, AFAIK,
that can secede from the United States at any time. It's part of the
charter that made Texas a state, a sort of pre-nuptial agreement.

It's something you hear about every so often, some random wing-nut
trying to formally bring up the secession question, and while it might
be political madness, in practicality it's not actually that insane.
Texas is one of the few American states that could probably function
self-sufficiently. It certainly has all the resources: vast swaths of
arable land, water, its own oil supply, a lot of coastal ports for
shipping, minerals, etc.

California, by contrast, is completely un-self-sustainable, for the
reason we're seeing right now: it doesn't have enough water on its own.
Not even remotely. Most of Southern California's water supply comes from
the Colorado River, which is controlled by the Southern Nevada Water
Authority.

Most Americans overlook the fact that the entire West, from essentially
the Rockies onward and probably the Missouri River, only exists because
of a lot of hardcore irrigation and water diversion; I think there's
something like less than ten rivers in the entire West that aren't
dammed or diverted somewhere along their course, out of thousands. It's
part of the reason it would be so frigging hard to split that territory
into independent nations, because without the federal system maintaining
all of that water, things would go very bad very quickly. (I lived for
fifteen years in Las Vegas, a city that literally could not exist
without constant intervention, and if you want a dystopia with a low
barrier to entry, imagine Las Vegas if the Colorado runs out of water.
The city would die within a matter of weeks, if not days.)

Texas could basically tell the rest of the US to go screw and, in
theory, get away with it. (So could Alaska, for obvious reasons, but why
in Hell would they want to?) But if you wanted to go all sci-fi on it
and break California into NoCal and SoCal, you could just as easily do
the same with East and West Texas, or even three states: everything west
of Austin, everything east and north of Austin, and everything south and
east of Austin.

I don't think America could be broken up easily because so much of our
infrastructure requires federal oversight, mainly due to geography and
the sheer scale involved. I just drove from Yakima, Washington, in the
northwest, to Ferguson, Missouri in the rough geographic middle to cover
the protests, and if you've never done that, it's an object lesson in
just how incredibly big and empty most of the western US is. I drove one
stretch on I-93 roughly equivalent to driving from London to Edinburgh
through central Nevada where I saw maybe ten other cars in four hours,
and there aren't even gas stations for a hundred miles or more, just the
Big Empty. When I got back I'd driven 5200 miles, and that was only
halfway across America and back.

You could argue that we could establish a treaty body to regulate
between American nation-states, but, hell, if you think it's bad with a
federal system, imagine if the states actually still did have those
pre-1965 rights. Or what would happen up here in the Pacific Northwest
if the dominionists and/or skinheads actually did take Idaho and parts
of Washington and Oregon, as they've been wanting to do for a long time.
How do you deal with that?

I just don't see it, barring massive catastrophe. But I could be wrong.

[![Steve
Halter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4690)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.stevenhalter.com)
[Steve
Halter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4690)
| [September 8, 2014
16:17](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958331)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**48:**

I would argue that internal politics in the US is quite different than
in European nations and arguments that are valid there do not
necessarily apply.

I deeply agree that the problem of Transnational corporations is going
to become more pronounced and not less unless nation states seek to
redefine them in a fairly fundamental way. When you are defined to be an
essentially sociopathic profit seeking organism, then that is how you
will act. As Charlie says, this is a deep problem.

[![John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)
replied to [this comment from R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958321)
| [September 8, 2014
16:20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958332)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**49:**

Texas is a good example, as it composed of roughly five or six regions:
the piney forests of East Texas, really more like Louisiana or Arkansas,
the lakes and prairies around Dallas, the Gulf Coast, the central hill
country surrounding the People's Republic of Austin, the South Texas
plains and Big Bend country (which is to say Chihuahua and Coahuila),
and the Panhandle that no one would know what to do with if it weren't
for the oil and cattle.

(The one thing you notice about the US of A is that those regions that
are stuck in low upward mobility and some of the highest income
inequality are those states that had the institution of slavery. It
appears this institution has brain damaged both victims and victimizers
alike at a long-term societal level, and I would suggest as still
another argument against small-state provincialism).

What would be an interesting experiment to build a Wall of Mordor around
Texas, and check back on them in one hundred years...

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
| [September 8, 2014
16:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958333)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**50:**

**ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE**

That's enough comments about splitting the USA, folks. It's a minor
sub-topic in the broad thrust of the argument about Scotland, and it's
in danger of derailing the discussion -- especially as more American
readers hit the end of their workday and have time to chip in.

[![Steve
Halter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4690)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.stevenhalter.com)
[Steve
Halter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4690)
replied to [this comment from Joshua
Ellis](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958330)
| [September 8, 2014
16:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958334)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**51:**

While Texas may teach that it can secede, that isn't actually based in
any fact. In the 1845 Joint Resolution for Annexing Texas, there is a
clause allowing Texas to be divided in to 5 states. There is no
secession clause.

[![Soames](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2171)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Soames](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2171)
| [September 8, 2014
16:26](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958335)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**52:**

I quite like the idea of small nations and have long felt that 3-10
million or so population countries are in a good position to have
efficient, effective and close to the people government. By which logic
England is very much too large. I started thinking that way when I moved
here from NZ and experienced living in a mega city and densely populated
country.

A down side is that one gets pushed around, or could be by larger
entities. New Zealand, to a certain extent, plays the same game as other
European small countries but if push comes to shove, we don't have a lot
of hard influence on bigger countries. Now given we are ages from
everyone, we can get away with that. But in an age of a revanchist
Russia and the rise of an excitable China I'm starting to wonder if
there is safety in size or numbers.

[![John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958333)
| [September 8, 2014
16:31](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958336)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**53:**

Noted. Let's say worst comes to worst.

How about the scenario of a 1) a failed Scotland in, say, five years,
versus, 2) a failed UK in five years?

Obviously, Scotland has no nukes, not that I'm aware of, so that's an
obvious difference.

[![Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4685)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b)
[Andrew
Gray](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dbc681970b")
| [September 8, 2014
16:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958337)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**54:**

So, if the referendum doesn't result in an independent Scotland, what do
you see the longer term outcome being? Any possibility of a more
federalized UK, possibly with a separate English parliament or even
England being split into regions?

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958336)
| [September 8, 2014
16:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958338)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**55:**

Define "failed". Even Greece doesn't quite qualify for the same
adjective as, say, Iraq or Libya today. Are we talking economics?
Ireland weathered a massive down-turn only 5-7 years ago but is now
recovering. For a state to actually *fail* usually entails more than an
economic recession, or even national bankruptcy; it tends to require a
breakdown in the mechanisms of state legitimacy, enforcement of law and
order, and disintegration of the currency system. I don't see *any* way
(short of Mr. Putin's people accidentally launching a Big One) for
*either* Scotland or rUK to "fail" in that way within the next five
years.

(The British nuclear deterrence makes no difference insofar as it's
entirely dependent on -- indeed, an annex to -- the US naval deterrent:
AIUI the Trident D5s come from the same pool as the USN Tridents and are
maintained by Boeing in the USA. In other words, the USA can pull the
plug on the British "independent" deterrent and within 12 months it will
have degrated to, at best, free-fall bombs dropped from Tornado GR4's or
Typhoon-IIs -- assuming the expertise still exists to rework the
Trident-compatible physics packages into something that fits in a
free-fall bomb not unlike the (retired) W-177.)

[![John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)
replied to [this comment from
Soames](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958335)
| [September 8, 2014
16:49](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958339)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**56:**

"close to the people government"

Government close to the people also suppresses best.

Again, you can have Big Government at the local level, and Small Big
Government can be far worse than a vast tenuous out-of-touch and far
away Big Government.

Examples: Albania, East Germany. Henry Ford's River Rouge Complex,
Homeowner's Associations, and the book Red Plenty and...

[http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/09/ferguson-worst-governments.html](http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/09/ferguson-worst-governments.html)

[![John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[John
Kurman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4687)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958338)
| [September 8, 2014
16:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958340)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**57:**

I suppose I was thinking more in economic terms vis a vis, downside for
Scotland, versus downside for the UK.

[![Phil
Edwards](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4692)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01538ef8e340970b)
[Phil
Edwards](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01538ef8e340970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01538ef8e340970b")
| [September 8, 2014
16:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958341)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**58:**

If I had a vote I honestly don't know how I'd use it. I've always been
sympathetic with Scottish (and Welsh) nationalism; I don't have any
particular investment in the UK applecart staying horizontal; and I
think there is a genuine argument to be made about rebuilding class
solidarity within smaller political units (I assume that the longer
version of this post would have made it).

But I worry. There's a really interesting symposium on the referendum in
the current LRB. Ferdinand Mount makes the point that the Yes campaign
is rich in creative writers, and that they're a bit too fond of big
statements about the Future is Unwritten and we can Dream a New Dream;
it's a bit of a lampoon, but there's a grain of truth to it. And John
Burnside distinguishes between the actual referendum question ("Should
Scotland be an independent nation?") and the original proposed wording
("Do you agree that Scotland should be an independent nation?"). He says
he's temperamentally inclined to a Yes answer to the first question, but
answers No to the second on the general basis of "agree - with this
shower?"

I worry that the practicalities are in the No basket, in other words.
Salmond & co have been posed some massive practical challenges, and as
far as I can tell they've done nothing to address them other than saying
"we'll sort them out later - and by that time we'll be in a stronger
negotiating position, so it'll be fine". It's a weird kind of
brinkmanship - instead of two parties daring each other not to go up to
the edge, we've got one determined to go over the edge and daring the
other not to pick up the pieces.

Incidentally, does anyone know what's going to happen to party politics
if there's an independent Scotland? Will the unionist parties dissolve,
on the grounds that they're no longer required? (Even if 48% of the
voters voted No?) Or will the SNP dissolve, on the grounds that its
mission has been accomplished - and what will it stand for if it
doesn't?

[![JamesPadraicR](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1040)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[JamesPadraicR](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1040)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958333)
| [September 8, 2014
16:58](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958342)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**59:**

*especially as more American readers hit the end of their workday and
have time to chip in.*

Umm, the workday is (mostly) just starting over here. Maybe they're
using work machines?

And Paw4thot @45; that's "Anchorage", like the town where fishing boats
weighed anchor.

Sorry, pedant switch gettting flipped. Other than that I'm staying out
of this.

[![Alex
Tolley](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4671)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.spaceshipdreams.com)
[Alex
Tolley](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4671)
| [September 8, 2014
17:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958343)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**60:**

IIRC, a few years ago THE Economist ran an article suggesting that
smaller states were "happier" and possibly more successful.

While smaller states might be easier fodder for corporations,
interestingly Iceland did not kowtow to the banking interests in 2008
and subsequently recovered a lot better than nations that did. Anecdotal
evidence to be sure, but is does suggest that small states can have
greater freedom than larger ones.

The more interesting questions for Scotland, post independence, are
whether it should stay in the EU and whether to be part of NATO.

[![Francis
Spufford](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4693)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Francis
Spufford](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4693)
| [September 8, 2014
17:20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958344)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**61:**

Hi, Charlie. Can I, as a contribution to the debate rather than an
exercise in spamming, attach a link to a YouTube video of me and Ken
Macleod trying to make a writerly case from the left for No ?

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOnk1FzX1jA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOnk1FzX1jA)

[![cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)
| [September 8, 2014
17:33](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958345)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**62:**

The referendum really mixes up two things: the long-term vision, and the
particular case of whether the SNP is up to the job right now in
Scotland. As others have noted, to get to the long term, you have to get
through the short term --- and the SNP pronouncements that filter
through to here in the States seem to involve a certain amount of denial
about what that entails.

Take the recent fracas about whether there would be border posts between
England and an independent Scotland. The SNP insists that there wouldn't
be, and accuses "better together" of scaremongering for even raising the
subject. But that's just the normal state of affairs for an
international border; you don't see them much in Western Europe because
of the Schengen agreement, but the UK is not a party to Schengen, and I
don't see how Salmond can presume that the rump UK would agree to a
Schengen-like agreement with Scotland. Failing that, you get border
posts, as we have between the US and Canada, which is otherwise about as
tranquil a border as they come.

By itself, this isn't much of an issue, but a similar air of denial
pervades their consideration of currency management, and particularly,
the blithe assumption that it is not only possible, but desirable, for
Scotland to keep using a currency managed by a central bank that would
no longer have any real incentive, let alone formal responsibility, for
looking after Scottish interests. The current state of small nations
after the 2008 financial crisis is a warning here: Iceland did notably
better than a lot of other victims in part because they could, and did,
manage their own currency.

FWIW, if I was in Scotland, I might still be tempted to vote "Yes". I'd
be hoping that the SNP deals more responsibly than they currently
promise with these realities once they have to. But there may be better
odds of that than for anyone being able to drag the conservatives now in
control of Westminster from the 19th century back to the 20th.

Regardless, though, the first few years of an independent Scotland would
be a very bumpy ride. And if I were there, voting "yes", I'd be
expecting that.

[![Antonia T
Tiger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1791)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Antonia T
Tiger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1791)
| [September 8, 2014
17:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958346)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**63:**

What the current situation seems to be demonstrating is that as soon as
they think they are going to lose, the Westminster politicians start
making wild promises that amount to the devo-max that they refused to
countenance.

I think it's a bit late for that.

It does show that it is a good thing if you can scare the buggers.

And we have a General Election coming.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
| [September 8, 2014
17:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958347)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**64:**

*the kind of nationalism that brought us the Great European War ... is
pretty much dead.*

That may be true in western Europe. It's not at all true in the U.S.,
China, or (from what I can tell) Russia. India's BJP party has an
ethnonationalist streak a mile wide, and nationalism seems to be on the
rise again in Japan. The Middle East generally prefers religious
chauvinism, but that's not an improvement.

*the failure modes of a gigantic imperial power are almost always far
worse than those of a smaller nation*

One of the main failure modes of a smaller nation is to be forcibly
absorbed by a rising imperial power. The Scots you live among are surely
able to explicate this principle at some length.

In Chinese history, every so often people get really sick of the corrupt
central government that's been long captured by special interests and
they throw their support behind separatist movements. A few generations
later, people get really sick of the corrupt local governments and their
constant petty warfare and support unification movements.

[![Barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4632)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD)
[Barry](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD "http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD")
replied to [this comment from Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958301)
| [September 8, 2014
17:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958349)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**65:**

"As an American as well, I feel the opposite. Better to have localized
corruption that is easier to address on a small scale than serious
corruption in a distant and all powerful national government."

So far, the reality seems to be that corruption at the state level is
\*harder\* to address than at the federal level. Notice the effects of
the Tea Party takeover of many (US) state governments. \

[![Barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4632)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD)
[Barry](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD "http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD")
replied to [this comment from Andrew
Gray](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958312)
| [September 8, 2014
17:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958350)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**66:**

"We also have the side issue that the idea of state's rights became
associated with racism due to state-level opposition to civil rights in
the 60s. Though that seems to be fading, as things like legalizing drugs
and increasing environmental standards become more of a state-level
issue."

I would have thought so a few years ealier, but it's clear by now that
states' rights/Confederatism in the USA is much stronger than it had
appeared.

Note that the right is doing its level best to prevent blacks and
minorities from voting, and they're now barely denying it.

[![Barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4632)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD)
[Barry](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD "http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD")
replied to [this comment from R J
Eden](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958318)
| [September 8, 2014
17:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958351)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**67:**

"Well, yeah - Ferguson, Missouri is an example of how local governments
in the US are not like that anymore. OTOH, it's also evidence for the
proposition that smaller failed states cause smaller problems for people
outside of them."

Don't worry, the all-good state government - well, doesn't seem to have
done much. And Missouri is far from the worst state in the USA.
Mississippi, Alabama and Florida are worse any and every day, and other
states can match it on most days.\

[![Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958347)
| [September 8, 2014
18:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958352)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**68:**

\>\>One of the main failure modes of a smaller nation is to be forcibly
absorbed by a rising imperial power.

The solution to this is nuclear weapons. If Israel can do it with 8
million people, others can as well.

The annoying consequence is the planet eventually becoming even less
habitable, but SpaceX got that covered. :-)

[![sideways](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1607)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[sideways](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1607)
| [September 8, 2014
18:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958353)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**69:**

An interesting post. I find myself in the odd position of being a
leftish, Green voter who'll be lining up with the Tories and the Orange
Order and all sorts of others I wouldn't want to associate with, to vote
'no'. The last time I did that was when the vote on the creation of the
Scottish Parliament was held, and precisely because I suspected that
this is exactly where it would lead. Create any political unit, and it
will inevitably seek to increase its own power...

In part I think it's because I have an exactly opposite view to you on
the merits of small vs. large states. There are problems facing the
world over the next few decades - in terms of climate change, energy
shortages, for example, that I think a small number of large states are
more likely to stand a chance of solving than an enormous mosaic of
little ones.

Sadly, I think there's a real possibility - given for example, the rise
of Marine Le Pen in France, who is currently polling better than either
the UPM or Hollande's Socialists, that the EU may not hold together in
the next couple of decades, and in the event that this comes to pass, I
think larger countries will have a much better chance of weathering the
storm than small ones.

And then there's my gut reaction that I'd rather be a citizen of my
whole country than just the part of it that is north (or south) of the
Solway Firth and the Tweed. One can find oneself at a disadvantage
working in a country that one is not a citizen of and while I would
probably retain dual nationality, that wouldn't be true of the next
generation. Set against that, I accept that the agreement between the UK
and Ireland has meant that this has not thus far been a major issue but
a messy divorce between mutually antipathetic SNP-led and Tory-led
Governments may not end well... And the negative effects may go beyond
the short term.\

[![SFreader](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1132)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[SFreader](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1132)
| [September 8, 2014
18:40](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958354)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**70:**

An independent Scotland would be about the same as Norway in terms of
population, natural resources, sharing a border with a much larger and
more powerful neighbor, etc. So being a smaller economy isn't
necessarily a recipe for disaster.

Disaster would likely come from how much history the typical Scot tends
to drag along as part of his/her nationalistic baggage/self-identity. So
-- how divisive are the Scots? How much does family/clan
history/tradition matter in this? Has late 20th century immigration
diluted this aspect of Scottish nationalism to the point where 'Our
family has always ...' is no longer a sufficient argument?

In a referendum where every vote counts, what the ordinary Scot thinks
and does actually matters. How engaged are ordinary Scots in voting -
what's the typical voter turn-out? Which side can use social media more
effectively to get out the vote?

Neil Oliver's History of Scotland which recently aired on PBS suggests
that the Scots have yoyo-ed on this question for centuries, so unless
there's a new compelling reason for independence, and if the vote were
restricted to only the same socioeconomic class as in previous rounds,
the odds would favor 'no - no change'.

BTW - The only demos stats I could find for Scotland are on the UK gov
site which also show that the Scots have the highest level of
self-identifying themselves with their country even though Scotland has
(overall) a not-so-low net immigration. This could be where to place the
yes-vote fulcrum.

[http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/compendiums/compendium-of-uk-statistics/population-and-migration/index.html](http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/compendiums/compendium-of-uk-statistics/population-and-migration/index.html)

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
| [September 8, 2014
18:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958355)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**71:**

*The solution to this is nuclear weapons.*

Great. Now what's your solution to having large numbers of people
(sometimes erratic, usually stressed, occasionally drunk) with their own
nuclear arsenals?

[![Charles
H](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=977)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Charles
H](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=977) |
[September 8, 2014
19:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958356)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**72:**

I've got problems accepting any of these as decent solutions. Every
single one of them seems bad.

First off, a government is that entity which claims a monopoly on the
use of force in an area. Almost(?) all of them claim also the right to
delegate that use of force to other entities operating within their
jurisdiction. This is why embassies require extra-territoriality. But it
means you \*can't\* abstract away the physical layer. You can have
social service agencies that are non-geographically bound, but those
aren't governments. Even fixing potholes wouldn't make them governments.

Secondly, I'd like proof that smaller governments are less likely to
fail, as that's not the way I read history. (Admittedly, most countries
in history are "small countries", and ALL the big ones failed within 200
years. Sometimes they fail and reconstitute themselves in a radically
different form, e.g. the US before and after the decade of the 1860's.)

OTOH, I agree that a large democracy is probably impossible using any
existing structure. I think that a system with a hierarchical tree that
allows node division and recombination ala a B+Tree might work, but
notice that each level would need to only govern it's immediate "child
nodes". I once "sort of" designed a system where at the root level one
out of 50 citizens was "elected" to the base level council. One out of
50 of those was "elected" the the next higher level council. Etc. It
required not a majority vote, but a sufficient number of citizens
"signing up" to support them...and citizens could remove their name from
the supporter, or move it to someone else at any time. If you dropped
below the critical level you were out. And this applied to even those
who had been delegated up to the top node. This might not have worked,
but it sure would have been interesting. Clearly it couldn't support
more than 50 levels of nodes, but an m-way B+Tree with an m of 50 and a
height of 50 can handle a huge number of entries. So you need a rule
that whenever the tree is more than 50% full, you increase the value of
m by one.\
 (My original design called for an m of 13, because that seems to be the
best size group for a reasonable decision...but 50 isn't too bad, and 13
wouldn't handle enough.)

Another thing that's needed is a limit on the length of laws (and forbid
inclusion by reference, unless you want to include the length of the
referred to law in the length of the law). And a limit on the number of
laws. When you hit the limit, you need to remove a law to add a law. And
a test for comprehensibility. If the average citizen can't understand
it, then it can't be a requirement that the citizens obey it. (You
determine this by having several classed of high school seniors, chosen
at random, write essays about what the law means, and answer a multiple
choice test. If the law fails the multiple choice test [i.e., if there's
not a 70% or better pass rate with the correct answers being supplied as
an appendix to the law] then the law is not considered valid. If the
essay questions are not in substantial agreement, then the law is also
not considered valid. [This second test is, admittedly, more subjective.
I can't think of a better way to put it though.])

[![sideways](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1607)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[sideways](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1607)
replied to [this comment from
SFreader](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958354)
| [September 8, 2014
19:25](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958357)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**73:**

*Disaster would likely come from how much history the typical Scot tends
to drag along as part of his/her nationalistic baggage/self-identity. So
-- how divisive are the Scots? How much does family/clan
history/tradition matter in this? Has late 20th century immigration
diluted this aspect of Scottish nationalism to the point where 'Our
family has always ...' is no longer a sufficient argument?*

As a late 20th Century migrant myself, I'd say yes, it pretty much has.
Even in the last 20 years, I'd say it's changed for the better. The
dying embers of the old Protestant/Catholic divide haven't quite
entirely cooled, but I think they're heading that way. And most people
would look blankly if asked what clan they're from. Scotland is not
Albania. The clan feud thing is pretty much an 18th Century thing,
though there might be one or two places up north I wouldn't let people
know if I was a Campbell...

[![TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958302)
| [September 8, 2014
19:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958358)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**74:**

@21:\
 With all due respect, the US States are not governments; they're
regional/municipal administrations \
 ---\
 Not even close, Charlie. You'd have to rewrite both the Constitution of
the USA and the fifty state constitutions to support that viewpoint.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from Francis
Spufford](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958344)
| [September 8, 2014
19:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958359)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**75:**

Youtube away! (I'd have been at the Summerhall debate except that was
the day this 'orrible chest infection first dug its claws into me.)

[![hetermeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=44)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[hetermeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=44)
| [September 8, 2014
19:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958360)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**76:**

I find the concept of more and smaller states simultaneously romantic,
infuriating, and unworkable.

Here's the problem: empires.

Here's the worse problem: corporate empires.

Small nation-states (contiguous territories occupied by a group of
people who were sufficiently homogeneous to be considered a nation) have
existed since the neolithic. They aren't the only form, because there
have always been mobile tribes who did not defend a contiguous
territory, but with the advent of agriculture, there's been a need to
defend fields and trails, if nothing else.

For who-knows-how long, but at least 4,000 to 5,000 years, there have
been empires, which are states that have conquered other states and
subjugated them. It's a simple issue, really: if a chief gains power in
a nation, there's only so much he can rule. After a while, if he asks
for more resources, his subjects will throw him out. It's far better to
conquer weaker neighbors, add them as subordinates, take their surplus,
and expand as far as possible. China, Rome, and the Mongols were the
first truly large-scale practitioners of this art, but it's even turned
up in Micronesia (the Yap Empire). It takes very little other than fixed
populations with uneven resource bases) to start an expansionist
imperial tradition.

So basically, breaking the world up into lots of little states means
there are lots of little fish for would-be empire builders to conquer.
That is not a happy place to live.

Even more unfortunately, at this time, who are the empire-builders? I'll
give you a big hint: look at the skyline of any modern city. What are
the biggest buildings? They aren't palaces or temples, they are
corporate offices. That's who's waiting in the wings if we chop up
conventional government power. World government by giant corporations
would be chaotic, to say the least, because there is no hierarchy and no
structure in the business world. Rather, it's something like an
aristocratic anarchy (where the richest live in something like a
post-scarcity world ranked in power), something like what the mongol
hordes used to practice before Genghis Khan showed up, and partly a
unique system of governance whereby the structure is optimized to pass
the buck and avoid taking responsibility, rather than take
responsibility for keeping the system together.

Making the world safe for corporate domination by breaking up the only
things (like the US) powerful enough to (theoretically) oppose the big
corporations will emphatically not make the world a better place.
Everything from the Spanish Conquest to Putumayo argues exactly the
reverse, as do conditions in much of corporate India, China, and
Bangladesh, among many others.

So while I don't like the way the American Empire is functioning right
now (and ditto with China and Russia), I think carving these up on
purely ideological grounds would be even worse.

How do I feel about Scottish independence? Let's see what happens. If my
pessimistic predictions come to pass, you'll see a Scottish Parliament
that's a bunch of corporate sock puppets, even more than they are now,
as Scotland becomes a minor colony of the corporate world.

Hopefully I'm wrong.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958345)
| [September 8, 2014
19:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958361)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**77:**

*Take the recent fracas about whether there would be border posts
between England and an independent Scotland. The SNP insists that there
wouldn't be, and accuses "better together" of scaremongering for even
raising the subject. But that's just the normal state of affairs for an
international border;*

Nope.

There is a **strong precedent**: namely another nation of about 5
million people that split from the UK within living memory (just) -- the
Republic of Ireland! Most likely any constitutional settlement by the UK
government for allowing one nation to leave will follow existing
precedent and case law relating to the other. (There's no reason *not*
to, and it makes the whole business vastly simpler to organize if you
know what the legal consequences and issues are going to be in advance.)

\1. There are no border checkpoints between the Republic of Ireland and
the UK (yes, Northern Ireland is part of the UK). I know this because I
drove from the one to the other two weeks ago. Seriously, I'm trusting
my own eyes here.

\2. British citizens prior to the separation of Ireland have the right
to claim Irish citizenship. Residents of Ireland after the separation
were granted Irish citizenship *as well as* their existing British
citizenship (which some chose to ditch -- but note that the UK
recognizes dual and multiple nationality, and indeed you have to
proactively petition to get rid of your British nationality unless you
trip over some piece of 21st century anti-terrorism law of dubious
constitutional legality).

\3. British citizens *today* have unlimited right of entry and residence
in the Republic of Ireland and can vote in Irish elections if they live
there and register to vote. And vice versa. After a period (I think it's
3 years) they can take an oath of allegiance and acquire an Irish
passport. I believe it's become harder in recent years for most people
to acquire British citizenship ... but it's still easier for Irish
citizens than anyone else.

Upshot:

If Scotland leaves the UK *and the Irish precedent is applied to the
separation*, then anyone in Scotland at the time will simply acquire a
second nationality, and anyone in the rUK will retain right of residence
and voting rights if they move to Scotland, and vice versa.

I believe the onus is on the doom-sayers to explain *why a prior
existing equitable precedent would **not** be applied* in the case of
Scotland, especially as Ireland left the UK under conditions of
considerably greater acrimony!

[![cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958361)
| [September 8, 2014
19:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958362)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**78:**

Conceded on the borders issue --- I was honestly unaware of the Irish
precedent. I still find the currency thing worrisome, though...

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958362)
| [September 8, 2014
20:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958364)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**79:**

Ireland ran its own currency, pegged at a 1:1 exchange rate to the Pound
Sterling. It ran it on that basis for nearly 50 years, and there wasn't
a thing that the British government could have done to stop it. (Irish
Pounds were, during that period, recognized as equivalent in the UK for
all non-banking purposes.)

If a future Scottish government wants to peg its currency against
Sterling, then, again: that's what'll happen. Westminster can't stop
them. (We even have currency issuing banks already, although they're
licensed by the Bank of England and are required to have deposits on
hand with the BoE to cover their issued cash obligations. Presumably a
different relationship/authority would be required if the Scottish
government wanted to float the currency on their own. Most likely
there'd be a bond issue to create the debt against which the currency
could then be issued, via the existing issuing banks -- Royal Bank of
Scotland, Bank of Scotland, and Clydesdale Bank. (I believe Linen Bank
also has a license to print currency but it hasn't been used in 50
years. Possibly the Scottish government would simply purchase it and go
into the printing business for themselves.))

My broader point stands: **there is a precedent for a constituent nation
peacefully leaving the UK within the past century**. (Well, relatively
peacefully. There was an attempted revolution in 1916 ...) And there is
no obvious reason why that precedent should not be applied in event of a
"yes" vote; in fact, I think the onus is on the skeptics to explain why
an existing precedent would be set aside.

[![cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958364)
| [September 8, 2014
20:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958365)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**80:**

A peg is a reasonable starting point, in part because it can be
abandoned with minimum fuss when the interests of Scotland and England
diverge far enough. Straight currency union is a lot harder to untangle,
though, as we've seen in the Eurozone.\
 (Spain and Portugal would be prime candidates for devaluation, if they
could, but the logistics make it nearly impossible.) And full currency
union, with both England and the rump UK continuing to use the pound, as
managed by the Bank of England, does seem to be the SNP's preferred
position at the moment.

[![Vince
Mulhollon](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4695)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Vince
Mulhollon](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4695)
replied to [this comment from
gasdive](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958281)
| [September 8, 2014
20:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958366)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**81:**

WRT post \#2 Gasdive's "Could nations and their services be abstracted
from the physical layer?"

The phrase to search for is "Franchise Operated Quasi National Entity"
and that leads to Stephensons "snow crash" and "diamond age".

In my infinite spare time I've contemplated rolling something like this
out where the franchise would be extremely small indeed (like morocco
sized) and of almost a theme park environment. So live in Ancient Athens
for awhile with rather strict building codes and importation laws. Or
live in the country of civil war re-enactor-ville for a summer. Or
furry-land. Or whatever your peculiar idea of utopia resembles. Its
quite a puzzle. You could say its like abstracting the legal financial
and other business concerns of Disney Land from the Disney IP and
slapping in a variety of other IP.

[![cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)
| [September 8, 2014
20:25](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958367)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**82:**

Ummm... make that "both Scotland and the rump UK". (Can't edit.)

[![Foxessa](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2968)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://foxessa-foxhome.blogspot.com/)
[Foxessa](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2968)
| [September 8, 2014
20:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958370)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**83:**

After Independence the former colonies did try that loose confederation
of states. It was an abject failure -- and that when the U.S. was only
13 states.

Thus the Constitutional Convention and the battle over a strong central
government and states rights -- which hasn't been resolved yet, not
really.

Some things states and localities do better, others -- such, for
instance slavery, Jim Crow, big public works such as dams and railroads
(which are necessary if that shrinking globe and travel is to be
maintained), many small entities can not or will not, or do not do at
all, i.e. former the slavery states which are against any cooperative,
public works at all -- so much so that they couldn't even cooperate with
each other while fighting the Union in the Civil War.

And then, of course, as with the Civil War, the entities wish to expand
into the territories of others, and bring their rules, regs, and slaves
with them, overriding what was already there. The Civil War was not
fought to contain slavery, but to prevent slavery's drive to expansion.\

[![Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958355)
| [September 8, 2014
20:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958371)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**84:**

Valar Morghulis.

Nuclear bomb is 1940-s technology. Sooner or later everyone will be able
to afford it.

[![Aigarius](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4697)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.aigarius.com)
[Aigarius](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4697)
| [September 8, 2014
21:16](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958372)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**85:**

For a person from a sub-3m EU country the ideal end-state world view
would consist entirely of sub-10m nation states that all belong to the
same coalition that is an equivalent the what EU + NATO + Shengen are
now - the central bodies of EU coordinate minimal possible common policy
and standards, NATO drives security and disaster relief and Shengen
regulates flows of people and goods.

This is also the response to how to handle "crazy" US states without the
federal government - they must adhere to the same EU-like laws and
regulations to participate in the international trade on the same level
as others.

And if anyone gets out of line - he gets "Putinized"

[![hetermeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=44)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[hetermeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=44)
replied to [this comment from
Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958371)
| [September 8, 2014
21:17](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958373)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**86:**

Everyone having nuclear weapons? See Tom Lehrer's song "Who's Next?"\
 \
 Here's the stupid thing about that: Somewhere, unless I threw it out,
I've got the blueprints for a nuke. It's an engineering joke,
non-functional in multiple ways (among other things, the circuit diagram
is the most intricate multi-pathway short-circuit it's ever been my
privilege to examine). However, it makes the problems with nuclear bombs
quite plain. Nuclear warhead design is comparatively simple, simple
enough that someone can sell a parody plan and not be nailed by the FBI
for leaking secrets. Designing something that can be delivered by a
device smaller than a semi-trailer is not so simple (the nuke in the
joke was about three meters long, one meter wide, and weighed around
5,000 kilos, if I remember right). Designing and building the
infrastructure to produce the heavy water, enriched uranium, plutonium,
and high explosives is many orders of magnitude harder still, and
impossible for people not to notice. That's why the IAEA focuses on
infrastructure. Given our post-9/11 silly paranoia, I'm not sure I want
to hang onto that stupid blueprint (heaven forfend that a terrorist get
their hands on it), but it makes the point abundantly clear: building
the infrastructure to build a nuke is very, very difficult, massively
more difficult than designing the bomb that would use all those exotic
materials.

[![Martin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4637)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Martin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4637)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958303)
| [September 8, 2014
21:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958374)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**87:**

I like the idealism, I have grave doubts about the practicality.

A retrospective analysis of Trump may well be instructive - but then,
Salmond had already overridden the local council's objections to the
initial plans. However - Trump, being a foreigner, can't contribute to
British political parties.

What's more instructive is the SNP response to a bus magnate giving them
a half-million pound contribution. By sheer coincidence, and in no way
connected to this fact, their manifesto promise to re-regulate the
Scottish bus industry (and interfere with his profits) was dropped from
the manifesto a month later.

My disquiet comes from the fact that a small country is cheaper to buy,
and cheaper to corrupt. The Labour Party in Glasgow operates its
selections in a non-transparent fashion - the effect was to create the
perception that the First Minister was selected by a small committee in
the City Chambers. Similarly, it was the Falkirk constituency where a
Labour Party power struggle (between Unions and Party HQ) was revealed
to have distorted democracy.

But that's small scale - I also have doubts on the regional scale. While
you champion the Westphalian ideal, it was still a German confederation
of small states, rather than a single German nation, that started a war
in 1914. Small countries have no credible first-world defence against
bigger countries; alliances rely on the big members. The Baltic States
can realistically hope to hold up first-echelon Russian troops for
hours, not days; to stand up against Putin's "hybrid war" for days, not
weeks.

Yes, I like the ideal. No, I doubt the practicality. It's like
unilateral disarmament - look how well the Budapest Agreement has worked
for the Ukrainians (and they had everyone's signature on the paper). Ask
yourself whether the Russians would have invaded a Ukraine that could
"accidentally" drop some non-persistent nerve agents (or worse) on the
Russian "training camps"... Depressingly, I worry that we're in a world
where a Trident replacement is now more likely, not less likely.

[![allynh](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1350)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[allynh](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1350)
| [September 8, 2014
21:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958375)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**88:**

Charlie,

For most of my life I would get sick 3 or 4 times a year with head
colds, chest colds, flu, etc..., on occasion leading to full blown
pneumonia. Then a couple of years ago I started rinsing my nose out
twice a day with saline, using a squeeze bottle from NeilMed. Plus, I
would use a neutral ointment like aquaphor to keep the inside of my nose
moist throughout the day.

For two years now I have not been sick.

Try that and see if it works for you.

[![Martin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4637)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Martin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4637)
| [September 8, 2014
21:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958376)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**89:**

Ooops - forgot this point. I'm an internationalist, not a nationalist.

I'd like to see a world where personal allegiance is not taken to be an
exclusive concept (i.e. the "if you're Scottish, you can't be British"
attitude of the more extreme SNP types).

..oh, and World Peace, Stan \

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Martin](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958376)
| [September 8, 2014
22:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958378)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**90:**

I should have added: I'm an internationalist too.

And I find the expression of English nationalism that has blown up in
the past 20 years absolutely repellent -- the worst kind of Little
Englander jingoism is not the norm, anti-immigrant sentiment has become
a socially acceptable outlet for expression of racist sentiments, and
the sort of exclusionary discourse which was the territory of the
fascist fringe in the 1970s and 1980s, the BNP and NF, is now everyday
currency among the main political parties.

There is, worryingly, a lot *less* xenophobia among the Scottish
nationalist movement than there is in the English political mainstream.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
allynh](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958375)
| [September 8, 2014
22:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958379)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**91:**

Three words: "I have a moustache". (There's nothing as vile as dripping
snot-infused water through your moustache.) But yes, I pay attention to
keeping my mucous membranes moist. Also: zinc FTW (at least when it
comes to stopping common colds getting bedded in).

[![D](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4698)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc2870970b)
[D](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc2870970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc2870970b")
| [September 8, 2014
22:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958380)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**92:**

Hi Charlie,

I am just wondering about your progress with Metabolic Syndrome. I have
achieved good results with the following:

5g creatine monohydrate powder\
 5g myo-inositol powder

mixed in a glass of water every morning.\

[![SFreader](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1132)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[SFreader](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1132)
| [September 8, 2014
22:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958381)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**93:**

"My disquiet comes from the fact that a small country is cheaper to buy,
and cheaper to corrupt."

However, if you now have to buy 400 countries instead of only 10 or 20
... that's way more expensive.

Personally, I'd also put a limit on corp size ... if grow beyond a
certain size, must spawn off into a new and completely separate entity.
Or, if you absolutely must grow that size, up the taxes .... It seems
that corporate tax rates/strategies are punitive to the mid-size corps,
basically forcing them to go on acquisition binges so that they can get
the large ($) corp tax breaks. Then they fall apart because whatever
they were originally good at doesn't really work when super-sized.

\

[![Barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4632)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD)
[Barry](http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD "http://profile.typekey.com/BarryD")
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958338)
| [September 8, 2014
22:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958382)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**94:**

"In other words, the USA can pull the plug on the British "independent"
deterrent and within 12 months it will have degrated to, at best,
free-fall bombs dropped from Tornado GR4's or Typhoon-IIs -- assuming
the expertise still exists to rework the Trident-compatible physics
packages into something that fits in a free-fall bomb not unlike the
(retired) W-177.)"

From what we know now, my money would be on the USA holding the codes to
the software.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
D](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958380)
| [September 8, 2014
22:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958383)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**95:**

Ha ha no. (Although I'm doing well enough on meds/weight loss/exercise
that I'm now down to annual reviews with the cardiology clinic.)

[![cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2915)
replied to [this comment from
SFreader](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958381)
| [September 8, 2014
22:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958384)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**96:**

*However, if you now have to buy 400 countries instead of only 10 or 20
... that's way more expensive.*

Depends what you're shopping for. If it's low, low, tax rates, or lax
safety inspections, then you don't need to buy all 400; you just need to
find a few whose pols are desperate (or corrupt) enough to deal, and
play them against each other for the best offer. See, for example,
shipping "flags of convenience", and the garment industry's endless
chase around the planet for the lowest wages. (Or, if you just look
within the US, how industries of various kinds play state governments
off against each other for tax breaks, or out and out subsidies.)

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Barry](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958382)
| [September 8, 2014
22:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958385)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**97:**

The physics packages are actually still built in the UK as far as I
know, using British-sourced plutonium -- although there may be some
pooling with the US stockpile; there's a unique nuclear sharing treaty
between the UK and USA. The British Trident warheads are based on a
standard US design, obviously, for compatibility; and the V-class SSBNs
and their reactors and systems are British built. But the rockets
themselves are a Boeing design and supplied by Boeing and form part of a
common maintenance pool with the US Navy stockpile: and that's the
choke-chain: intercontinental rockets aren't exactly maintenance-free
turnkey items with a multi-year shelf-life.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958384)
| [September 8, 2014
22:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958386)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**98:**

*you just need to find a few whose pols are desperate (or corrupt)
enough to deal, and play them against each other for the best offer.*

And that's where transnational treaty organizations like the EU, which
sets legal standards for business operations, should come in handy: you
can make it far too expensive (in terms of trade sanctions) for a
corrupt small country to play fast and loose with standards that way.
(The real problem is keeping corporate lobbyists out of the trade treaty
negotiating system, but that's an oversight issue in principle ...)

[![Ian
S](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2989)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Ian
S](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2989)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958361)
| [September 8, 2014
22:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958387)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**99:**

Charlie, Re Borders and Banks,

I think you are missing out on some characteristics of post 18th Sept,
if the vote goes the wrong way (yes).

For a start, the RBS has already said that it intends to jump ship for
London, and we can expect the other financial institutions to do the
same for good banking (and EU) type reasons. At the same time we can
expect the BoE to curtail the note printing activities of 'scottish'
banks - and for fairly similar banking type reasons.

As far as businesses are concerned, I'd expect most with presence both
sides of the border would seek to take advantage of the situation, and
to put most of their assets into the UK side (risk reduction). What
would be left in scotland would be branch office level - able to be cut
adrift if things went wrong.

See
[http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c38bd692-377f-11e4-bd0a-00144feabdc0.html\#axzz3ClNjMdYq](http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c38bd692-377f-11e4-bd0a-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3ClNjMdYq)

As such I think we are looking at a 'run on the country' - or rather a
run to get assets *out* of the country and the situation for those left
behind looks worse and worse as more and more jump ship. It looks like
some people in the BoE agree, with the expectation that they will impose
currency controls attempting to stem the flow of money; put in place on
the 19th.

Roll that forward to a putative 'independent' scotland, still using the
pound as it currency, and I think there will be border posts - put in
place by scotland to attempt to stem the tide of those easily
transportable, and very necessary, pounds out of the area. Bits and
bytes are much easier to stop than smuggling physical assets.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
TRX](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958358)
| [September 8, 2014
22:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958388)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**100:**

The US constitution delegates foreign affairs unambiguously to the
federal government. As a result, the US tends to seem more unified from
outside than from inside.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958385)
| [September 8, 2014
22:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958390)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**101:**

*intercontinental rockets aren't exactly maintenance-free turnkey items
with a multi-year shelf-life*

It's also fortunate that fusion bombs tend to go bad over time as the
tritium decays.

[![Jez
Weston](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4700)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.happyinmotion.com)
[Jez
Weston](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4700)
| [September 8, 2014
23:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958392)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**102:**

As someone living in a nation of 4 million, I'm entirely in favour of
nations of this size.

NZ has 120 MPs and most of them seem to be human beings, as opposed to
people who work for people who have helicopters.

Another major factor in political stability is proportional
representation. We've also a tradition of very [direct
democracy](dimpost.wordpress.com/2014/09/09/the-only-election-event-that-matters-aro-valley-meet-the-candidates),
complete with water pistols. The Occupy movement failed to take off
here, because there are easy paths to having your voice heard - most
minority positions are represented in parliament.

We're currently eleven days out from an election and the campaign is
proving Charlie's points. In a nation this size, then yes, it's easy to
buy your way into a political party and possibly parliament. We
currently have a bonkers rich guy running a vanity party on a religious
platform (the Conservatives) and another bonkers rich guy who has set up
a political party to avoid extradition to the US joining with what
remains of the far-left (Internet/Mana). Both may get enough votes for a
couple of MPs and therefore may end up as king-makers in a coalition
government.

However, here's the key point - the impact of failure is small and the
cause of failure can be understood and resolved. Yes, a minor party
could start throwing its weight around and threatening to bring down the
government unless said tiny party gets everything it wants. When that
happens, then NZ voters have shown a willingness to punish tiny parties
for behaving that way.

[![Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958386)
| [September 9, 2014
00:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958395)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**103:**

that's where transnational treaty organizations like the EU...

This is what I think a lot of peole above have missed. If you have
freedom of movement with common standard and restrictions, the freedom
of your local nation-state to be a unpleasant is limited. It's possibly
hard for people in the US to imagine because they don't have a lot of
the "common heritage" stuff (UNCHR, ICC for example) that makes the EU
actually work.

Fixing Je'z link to the [Aro Valley Meet the
Candidates](http://dimpost.wordpress.com/2014/09/09/the-only-election-event-that-matters-aro-valley-meet-the-candidates/)
above, I'm another kiwi (but I live in Oz) and the gap between NZ and Oz
politics does seem to be size related. In NZ I could meet not just my
local MP, but members of the other parties who were interested in my
area (list members, or candidates).

But in Australia I have only met about five or six serving members of
parliament, mostly Greens MPs. I've met my local federal member, but not
my local state member. It's much harder to get a chat about an issue in
Australia, despite them having 600-odd MP's for 20M people compared to
NZ with 120 MPs for 5 million.

[![Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)
| [September 9, 2014
01:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958396)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**104:**

Also, I have met and had polite discussions even with MPs that I
disagree with. During the Homosexual Law Reform Bill campaign I was one
of a small group of pro- campaigners that met with Police Minister John
Banks where we explained our view and he very politely explained that he
would be voting no. He is now, famously, disgraced former MP John Banks,
convicted fraudster. Schadenfreud!

In Australia... not so much. The closest I've come is hissing "sellout"
at Peter Garret while disrupting one of his party meetings (I was
wearing a koala suit at the time). He did take it in relatively good
humor, but on the other hand there were tv cameras present and they've
love to catch him shoving a koala off the stage...

[![numbernotami](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1340)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[numbernotami](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1340)
| [September 9, 2014
02:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958397)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**105:**

Re original post: This makes the opposite of sense. The smaller the
country, the greater the bargaining power of corporations threatening to
move operations elsewhere.

[![William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4701)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b)
[William
Livesley](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b")
| [September 9, 2014
02:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958398)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**106:**

This strikes me as a statement of belief (i.e. that smaller states are
better than larger ones). I see no particular proof of that and, as a
conservative (small c) I would counter with "if it ain't broke why fix
it?".

In terms of larger governments being in thrall to special interest
groups, I could quote many examples of the same thing happening at all
levels of government. Here in sunny Oakland, for example, local
government seems in thrall to the ACLU to the detriment of the
residents, particularly those whose civil rights are being violated by
being shot.

On the other hand, I suppose it is more a question of the size of
government which makes the governed feel happy. Clearly, if the Scots
vote yes then they feel happier with a government which more closely
reflects their beliefs, which they feel that the UK government does not;
I can't really disagree that the UK government tends to be more
right-wing than governments in Scotland.

I have no doubt that an independent Scotland will thrive, for the short
term at least. Longer term I am not so sure. It will depend on the
management of the demographics. However, what will happen the next time
a Darien scheme occurs? I suppose the European Central Bank steps in
instead of the Bank of England. It worked for Ireland.

I continue to be puzzled by how low key the treatment of this issue is
in the UK outside of Scotland. This is a big deal, yet the UK government
seems not to care. Perhaps I am missing something since I don't live in
the UK but I did spend much of the last month there.

I hope the Scots vote no, but I am resigned to them voting yes. Given
that, can they please keep the Royal Family when they leave?

[![EDP](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4702)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[EDP](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4702)
| [September 9, 2014
02:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958399)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**107:**

Charlie, at what scale would 1) fiscal policy and 2) monetary policy
(and thus currencies) be set in your post-Westphalian world?

I see a tension between the following:

\1) It's not much of a nation if it doesn't set its own fiscal policy.

\2) Setting fiscal policy at a smaller scale than monetary policy is
either unsustainable in the long run or sustainable only with a lot of
suffering in low-productivity regions of the monetary policy area (e.g.
euro crisis and its fallout).

\3) Having many small monetary policy areas is inefficient and
increasing the risk of destabilizing monetary crises.

[![Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)
| [September 9, 2014
02:58](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958400)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**108:**

*a statement of belief (i.e. that smaller states are better than larger
ones). I see no particular proof of that ... Here in sunny Oakland,*

Amd I right to take that as a statement that you think the US system of
government(s) is working well? I suspect that puts you in a minority,
even in your own country. To me, the US seems to work ok for
middle-aged, rich, straight, white, christian, men and worse the more of
those qualifications you lack.

Writing this I find myself inclined to compare the US to failed states
rather than any country I'd like to live in. I'd rather be poor and
black in the US than in, say, Zimbabwae. Hooray for the USA! (ex)muslim
and queer... yep, the US is better than Poland. Probably, and if I'm
also non-white then definitely. Either way better than Jamaica. But
compared to Japan or Estonia? Urk!

Interestingly, a lot of the poorer countries that the rich-white-male
demographic like tend to suck if you're not a RWM. As Scalzi has pointed
out, RWM is the lowest difficultly setting and playing at that level it
doesn't matter a huge amount where you start from. Hence the comments
from a couple of people above that if you're not in that lucky group,
your definition of a "working state" is likely to vary.

FWIW, I don't think Scotland is likely to become particularly awful
whichever way the referendum goes.

[![William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4701)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b)
[William
Livesley](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b")
replied to [this comment from
Moz](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958400)
| [September 9, 2014
03:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958401)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**109:**

And you concluded that how exactly?

I merely suggested that there is little proof that smaller countries
work better than larger ones.

Following your logic, I would assume that Zimbabwe is an excellent place
to live. After all it is a small country and has virtually no RWM.

[![Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)
replied to [this comment from William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958401)
| [September 9, 2014
03:25](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958402)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**110:**

Concluded what? That you think the USA works? I quoted the relevant
part, and asked whether that's what you actually think. Which is
explicitly an opportunity for you to say that you think the USA doesn't
work very well.

*Following your logic, I would assume that Zimbabwe is an excellent
place to live. After all it is a small country and has virtually no
RWM.*

How do you get from "Moz would rather be poor and black in the US than
Zimbabwae" to "Moz thinks Zimbabwae is an excellent place to live"?

Given our current state of knowledge it appears unlikely that it will
ever be possible to create a formal proof that smaller states work
better than large ones. But using a looser standard, and being selective
about how we measure "better", there are a range of measures of
"goodness" where increasing country size correlates with lower
performance. Education, health, happiness, social mobility, gini
coefficient, that sort of thing. Comparing similar countries, like
Germany and Denmark, gives similar results to comparing the USA to
Germany.

On other measures, like GDP and military spending, the USA does very
well. If you believe that money and power are what matters, that puts
the US on top. Or close to it, in GDP terms.

[![William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4701)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b)
[William
Livesley](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b")
| [September 9, 2014
04:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958403)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**111:**

Not interested in heading down this path since this is not the subject
of the discussion and I don't wish to bore my host. I would say that I
am not clear that I can define the relative value of success with
respect to states and any suggestion that the US is somehow a failed
state is facile. We know catastrophically failed states when we see them
but it's harder to say that state A is better than state B - how would
one compare Italy and Switzerland for example?

I believe that Scotland will operate as an independent state. I believe
also, however, that there are risks for an independent Scotland with
respect to its size and current industry base. Most of those risks are
ameliorated by the European Union (assuming Scotland is accepted) and
the European Central Bank.

The nightmare scenario would be that Scotland becomes independent and
then the European Union collapses. The possibility is small, but the
possibility of the European Central Bank becoming overwhelmed is
somewhat higher, particularly given the continued financial
irresponsibility of some of the bigger member states. If that happened
then small countries would risk a worse fate than that of Greece.

By remaining part of the U.K., Scotland would continue to have the U.K.
as financial guarantor, Scotland would continue to have a direct voice
and the UK would have a direct interest in the stability of Scotland.
Compare that to the influence of Scotland in Europe. How eager would
Germany (the major contributor to the ECB) be to bail out Scotland in
the event of major financial instability?

Speaking as an Englishman (although resident in the US) I think the UK
would miss the Scottish point of view. Scotland has many policies of
which I approve - a much more liberal funding of university education
for example.

[![Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Moz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4618)
replied to [this comment from William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958403)
| [September 9, 2014
05:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958404)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**112:**

I can't help feeling that your focus on money as the measure is limited
and unfortunate. Your argument appears to boil down to "the combined GDP
of Scotland plus England is greater than that of either alone, therefore
they should stay together".

At this stage it seems that partial monetary/financial union as the
Eurozone is doing doesn't work very well. So Scotland might get dragged
down by the ECB while the UK escapes. But by the same token, the City of
London types might destroy the pound leaving the Eurozone sitting there
saying "thank fsck we didn't let \*them\* in". I suspect the latter is
less likely, but I also doubt that the UK rulers have what it takes to
follow the Icelandic example rather than the Irish one.

If the world financial speculation system collapses, as seems
increasingly likely, I struggle to see how the City would escape with
much at all. More likely they'd take a haircut that would leave their
servants in the UK parliment gasping.

[![Jonathan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4696)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jonathan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4696)
replied to [this comment from Chris
Gerrib](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958295)
| [September 9, 2014
05:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958405)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**113:**

The problem here is that the States don't get to bear the full
responsibility of their actions. The Feds will bail them out if
necessary and for which they take a chunk of change to boot. Example: NC
denies AGW and sea level rise - FEMA to the rescue.

[![PrivateIron](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2580)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[PrivateIron](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2580)
replied to [this comment from
Moz](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958400)
| [September 9, 2014
06:15](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958406)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**114:**

Just to keep facts straight, Scalzi thinks SWM is the lowest difficulty
setting. He explicitly refused to consider class and that's where some
of us parted ways with him, while otherwise largely agreeing with his
gist or at least for the potential of the metaphor as a very basic
teaching tool.

While it verges on a tautology, I think Scotland should be independent
if that is how the people within its borders want to govern themselves.
(And it should remain in the UK if not.) As a theoretical matter I don't
know where I would draw the dividing line between areas that are
entitled to this choice and those that are not. On this specific issue,
I think I have an out because Scotland has been a viable political
entity in the past; so there is some reason to believe it could be so
again. We don't have an historical benchmark for some other areas of the
world, such as the western United States for example.

[![William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4701)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/typepad_logo.png)](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b)
[William
Livesley](http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b "http://profile.typekey.com/6p01b7c6dc42fc970b")
replied to [this comment from
Moz](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958404)
| [September 9, 2014
06:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958407)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**115:**

You are right in that the financial focus is limited. In many ways my
comments reflect the nature of the wider debate thus far (i.e. the
debate outside of this blog).

In the short term, and particularly in the light of the last 5 years,
Scotland should be concerned about financial stability. It is all very
well wearing a kilt and sgian-dubh but if, as in Spain, Scotland ends up
with 24% unemployment (currently around 6.5% in Scotland) then I can't
see that this is a good exchange.

The UK as whole has escaped much of the wider European financial woes of
the last 30 years and I can't see this changing in a hurry. I agree that
financial flight may be an issue with the UK but nothing currently
indicates that this will happen any time soon unless the UK decides to
leave the EU.

In the longer term, the problem for Scotland is one of demographics.
Scotland has a small population and whilst it is currently growing
slightly, this is after 40 years of decline. Changing this is going to
be difficult since letting in large numbers of outsiders will change the
nature of their society and (money again) may well prove expensive.
Without such a change, however, Scotland will face the sort of problems
currently envisaged for Japan, a greying population increasingly unable
to fend for itself.

The UK as whole faces a similar demographics problem. However, with a
population of 63 million, it is a little easier to absorb immigrants
without fundamental changes to the nature of the society; England, in
particular, has a history of accepting and (with some variation)
acclimatizing immigrants.

It's difficult to see what else could be debated here. The Scots are a
distinct social group with their own customs and history. In that sense
there should be no debate - if they as a group would rather have
self-determination then have at it. Clearly Scotland can prosper even
given the small size of the population, so there is no question that
Scotland can become a successful state.

I still get more than a whiff of headlong rush with little thought
spurred on by a ridiculously inaccurate portrayal of Scottish history by
Hollywood aided and abetted by a group of politicians with more vanity
than sense. I suppose we can at least blame the Americans if it all goes
pear shaped.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [September 9, 2014
08:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958409)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**116:**

Deliberately not reading intermediate commemts, yet ...\
 however:\
 *In 1648 to travel from the south of Scotland (from, say,
Berwick-upon-Tweed, the debatable walled border city) to the far
north-west would take, at a minimum, a couple of weeks by sea; to travel
that distance by land was a harsh journey of hundreds of miles across
mountains and bogs and through still-forested glens, on foot or
horseback.*\
 Total rubbish Chrlie.\
 I suggest you look up Carey's Ride.

There are many other reasons for voting NO\
 As I've posted elsewhere:\
 "WHAT "Peaceful transition"?\
 The biggest banks & many large employers will be moving out of Scotland
within hours of a "Yes" vote.\
 Scottish unemployment will quickly climb to Spanish levels, or even
higher - possibly over 25%\
 Money & supplies will run out & the Snats will immediately blame "the
rich" (i.e. any one with an income of more than (say) £75k a year & tax
them @ 60%+, thus triggering further flight.\
 [ This includes you, Charlie! ]\
 It will get messy.\
 Meanwhile, in England the tory ultra-right will revive, to everyone's
equal discomfort, & our unemployment will soar & wages decline also.\
 It really is not going to be nice if the Scots allow themseleves to be
conned by the SNP."

I think you are wrong about "The Westphalian State", too.\
 But, those states need to associate ( In an "EFTA" rather than "EU" -
style) & they need to fight back, on behalf of their populations against
the new (not so new, actually) international corporate monsters that are
sucking the life out of every citizen of those states.\

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
replied to [this comment from
JamesPalmer](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958296)
| [September 9, 2014
08:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958410)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**117:**

James Palmer:*Not to mention that the Scottish economic vision put
forward by Salmond is highly favorable to corporate power ...*\
 AND\
 Don't forget the stasi side of the SNP.\
 They are a modern version of the Presbyterian interferers, running
every aspect of your comestic & social life, know what's "good for you"
too ...\
 Couple these & you have corporate-state, semi-socialist panopticon
vision of some sort of hell or other ....

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
replied to [this comment from Pete
Jordan](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958306)
| [September 9, 2014
08:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958411)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**118:**

*The only practicable control I can see is in larger federal entities,
like the EU or beyond that the UN*\
 Except that the corrption here is even worse.\
 It's why I've turned against the EU, having been a fervent supporter
since about 1964 .....\
 Oh & Charlie @ 26\
 Agree 150% with your analysis, disgree 100% about the solution to this
nasty little problem.\
 Um.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958407)
| [September 9, 2014
09:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958413)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**119:**

The trouble with arguing demographics is we can't tell.

What makes a country an attractive place to live? If you go to Calais,
it's clear that the UK is considered a nice place to live and France
less so. There's lots of refugees keen to get into the UK and out of
France despite the weather after all. But there's plenty of older people
retiring from the UK to France...

Within the UK, including from Scotland, there's net internal movement
from just about everywhere to London. From London to the suburbs/Home
Counties. And then from that part of the country back to the country
proper.

Of course these are generalisations and net flows and so forth, there
are people who go the other way, people like me that look at London and
just won't consider applying for a job there and so forth.

But if Scotland is a different country, will Edinburgh exert that magic
pull for the Scots rather than London? It's easy to look at the Irish,
particularly the Irish working in London and say "No, they'll still go
to London" but Ireland still has a lot of weirdly Catholic laws and
official attitudes in place that Scotland hasn't had for centuries and a
large part of the the younger Irish people look at the laws and say
stuff that and move. I'm sure there are rebellious young Scots, but in
the same numbers?

Will Scotland, with a potentially genuinely left-of-centre government,
particularly if there is a Tory government that starts to privatise the
NHS get a nice influx of appalled English people? In a country of
currently 5M, 1M disgruntled English and Welsh people moving to Scotland
over say 5 years makes for a big bump in the demographics and offsets a
lot of potential years of small decline. That might not happen if
there's 25% unemployment but it might if there's similar unemployment to
the UK.

Better conditions for teachers, nurses and the like could be very
attractive too, and so on. The current government seems very keen on not
giving them pay rises despite shouting about how the economy is
recovering. A reasonably healthy Scottish economy might well be treating
them better.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958413)
| [September 9, 2014
09:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958414)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**120:**

(I meant to say, there's no guarantee of any of these things of course -
Scotland could equally go to hell in a hand-basket, but saying "It's
doomed!" (in, aptly, a Scottish accent) is just as unreasonable as
saying "It's all going to be wonderful." There are so many factors that
it's time to practise wu-wei.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
replied to [this comment from
hetermeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958360)
| [September 9, 2014
09:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958415)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**121:**

hetreromeles\
 SPOT ON!\
 Meanwhile, what are the SNP doing?\
 Pursuing "private wealth" - meaning the land you own is no longer yours
& you can't pass it on & will be (likely) broken up into smaller units -
the idiocy that ruined France & other places, agriculturally.\
 They are fighting a battle that is already 100 years out of date.\
 At the same time, carwling to corporate (Murdoch, euw) overlords.\
 NOT a pretty picture.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
| [September 9, 2014
09:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958416)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**122:**

On my way home last night, I saw the front page of a copy of the "Daily
Heil". This bore the front page headling "10 Days to Save Great
Britain". Well, if that's what the Daily Heil wants, that should be all
the reason anyone needs for voting the other way.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958378)
| [September 9, 2014
09:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958417)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**123:**

Chralie: And as an English & British Nationalist [note], can I garee
with you?\
 THIS is (another) reason why I loathe the SNP.\
 They are not actually pro-Scottish.\
 Their entire raison d'etre is based on hatred of the foreigner,
specifically, the English ...\
 IF they get independance, then, amongst the rapidly-increasing poverty
& unemployment, expect "sectarian" strife & petty oppression of "enemies
of the people" - and of course: "It was as if all the walls of the
houses in Geneva had been turned into glass"\
 [note] "nationalist" in the sense used by Therem Harth rem ir Estraven
{ "Left Hand of Darkness", U K le G }

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
JamesPadraicR](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958342)
| [September 9, 2014
09:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958418)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**124:**

Sorry; It's the only time I've ever written the place name, and I was
being surprised by the co-incidence of Anchorage being played as I made
a comment about Alaska!

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958386)
| [September 9, 2014
09:27](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958419)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**125:**

*\
 And that's where transnational treaty organizations like the EU, which
sets legal standards for business operat*\
 Except the opposite is happening.\
 The EU is crawling on its belly to the corporate giants & shitting all
over the rest of us.\
 Less-safe lightbulbs with Mercury in them, banning the use of safe
fungicides for allotment use, so the agribusiness crooks can clean up,
vacuum cleaners (etc) with ridiculous power-limits etc, etc ....ad
nauseam.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from Antonia T
Tiger](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958346)
| [September 9, 2014
09:27](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958420)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**126:**

An excellent analysis of the situation Antonia. I'm not sure the matter
is helped any by the fact that one of the main spokemen for that
position is an ex-MP, oh and a member of the Cabinet that were
responsible for the original Scotland Act.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958364)
| [September 9, 2014
09:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958421)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**127:**

Para 2 - The (British) Linen Bank is now a wholely owned subsidiary of
either RBOS or BOS (since about 1969 if memory serves).

Para 3 - I know you were in Dublin recently; it doesn't take a hugely
detailed exploration of O'Connell Street to find some of the bullet
holes in the statues there, or in the fabric of the General Post Office.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958398)
| [September 9, 2014
09:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958422)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**128:**

Para 6 - Some of us, OGH and myself included, would really rather that
rUK kept Lizzie Battenburg and the rest of the Saxe-Coburg-Gothes.

[![peteratjet](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2928)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[peteratjet](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2928)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958390)
| [September 9, 2014
10:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958424)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**129:**

I'm not a weapons physicist, but I thought that a thermonuclear bomb has
a lithium blanket that absorbs neutrons from the fission core detonation
and breeds the tritium at the point of use for the main D-T fusion
process.

[![edge1710](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4704)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[edge1710](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=4704)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958364)
| [September 9, 2014
11:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958425)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**130:**

If Scotland wants to join the EU don't they need to sign up to the Euro
as well? I think that's a requirement for all new member states. That is
if they have to sign up again.

[![Chris
Suslowicz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=3023)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chris
Suslowicz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=3023)
| [September 9, 2014
12:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958428)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**131:**

I'm not a weapons physicist either, but I believe most weapons begin
with a hollow sphere of plutonium into which tritium is inserted shortly
before the implosion charges are fired. The tritium (half-life of \~12
years) requires regular replacement, and to manufacture \_that\_
requires a nuclear reactor run at rather different settings than the
power generation ones. Hydrogen bombs rely on lithium deuteride for the
fusion phase.

The simplest (uranium gun) fission bomb is rather simple in engineering
terms and (thankfully) extremely difficult in terms of the
infrastructure needed to produce the enriched uranium to build it.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958407)
| [September 9, 2014
12:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958429)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**132:**

*The UK as whole has escaped much of the wider European financial woes
of the last 30 years*

Ya think?

The UK has gone from a Gini coefficient of under 0.30 --
Scandinavian/socialist level egalitarian -- to over 0.4 -- more unequal
than the USA; more unequal than any developed world nation, and pushing
close to sub-Saharan kleptocracy levels of stratification and social
immobility -- in just 35 years, thanks to Thatcher and her heirs
(Blair/Brown included).

They started by selling off the "family silver" -- some industries that
arguably shouldn't have been state-run to begin with -- but then
proceeded further than anyone has even dreamed of going in the US. For
example, they're in the process of turning the Highways Agency into a
GovCo (private company, government owned shareholding) and outsourcing
its work to the usual large contractors who make out like bandits;
they're using the TTIP trade treaty as a lever for privatizing the NHS
via the back door: they're also talking about privatizing the social
security and state pension systems in the next Conservative-led
parliament (if they get one). Meanwhile we have a ubiquitous
surveillance state, corrupt police intelligence agencies spying on
activists campaigning for enquiries into racist murders the police
didn't bother investigating, other undercover police officers fathering
families on activists then legging it (where is the Child Support Agency
when it's needed?) and a Conservative Party with so few actual
grass-roots members that at its last party conference in 2013 the
non-parliamentary constituency party members present were outnumbered by
corporate lobbyists trying to buy access to power.

In central London real people can't afford houses: entire streets have
been bought up (as investments) by sovereign wealth funds and left empty
to rot while homelessness explodes and in the still-affordable
neighbourhoods a 100 square foot "apartment" goes for roughly US $2000 a
month rent.

Oh, and average wages (adjusted for inflation) are down more than 20%
since 2008 and we're in [the longest recession since the South Sea
Bubble of the
1720s](http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/britain-has-taken-longer-to-recover-from-recession-than-at-any-time-since-the-south-sea-bubble-9645218.html)
-- most of the "recovery" is a property bubble driven by those sovereign
wealth funds I mentioned; when *Eric Schmidt* (let me jog your memory:
billionaire former CEO of Google) [can't afford a
house](http://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/20/london-property-boom-super-prime-market)
things are out of control.

Britain **hasn't** escaped the financial woes; it's just that the ruling
elite (and their Russian and Arab oligarch friends) opted for a
different package of them and outsourced the pain to the other 99.9% of
the population.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from William
Livesley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958407)
| [September 9, 2014
12:58](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958431)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**133:**

Note wrt. immigration: Scotland is apparently happy to accept
immigrants, to such an extent that when Alex Salmond said UK policy on
immigration was harming Scotland the opposition parties declined to take
a shot at him.

*England* is so hostile to immigrants this decade that policies that
were the preserve of the National Front, the British National Party, and
the extreme right of the Conservative Party -- total ban on immigration,
paying existing immigrants to "go home", mandatory deportation for
non-citizens found guilty of a criminal offense -- are now unexceptional
across the board; the level of dog-whistle racist xenophobia pervading
political discourse down south is breathtaking.

Upshot: without English xenophobia setting policy, Scotland *could*
receive the inward immigration it needs. But that's not going to happen
as long as we stay within the union.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958409)
| [September 9, 2014
13:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958432)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**134:**

Greg: *I suggest you look up Carey's Ride*

You're not helping refute my claim by citing an incident so famous that
it's remembered in the history books four centuries later.

Yes, a crown courier carrying FLASH priority documents with unlimited
remounts on tap at every stage could, if unwilling to sleep, make the
journey in a few days rather than a few weeks. This is like saying that
"of course, anyone can fly from Sydney, AUS to London in ten hours
rather than the usual 24" -- if they're sitting in the back seat of
something with afterburners and a string of in-flight refuelling tankers
waiting to fill them up without landing between each supersonic dash!

[![D.J.P.
O'Kane](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1612)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[D.J.P.
O'Kane](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1612)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958364)
| [September 9, 2014
13:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958433)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**135:**

Just when I think I've got out, they drag me back in.

"My broader point stands: there is a precedent for a constituent nation
peacefully leaving the UK within the past century. (Well, relatively
peacefully. There was an attempted revolution in 1916 ...) "

Charlie, posts like this make the baby Jebus cry. The "attempted
revolution" that began in 1916 lasted until 1922/3, and it may have
ended in de facto Dominion status for most of the land of my fathers,
but it was definitely not peaceful! There was no quarter asked or given
on either side, and I don't think it's a precedent you want to invoke as
you walk the streets of Edinburgh town (singing as you go, your kilt
flapping wildly in the breeze).

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from D.J.P.
O'Kane](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958433)
| [September 9, 2014
14:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958435)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**136:**

You are absolutely correct: maybe I should have sprinkled emoticons all
over that comment?

The point is, however bad-tempered and vindictive things get after
September 18th in event of a "Yes" vote, it's almost inconceivable that
they'll turn as bad as the situation in Ireland got. There's a little
bit of difference between an adversarial divorce and a civil war, after
all! Nevertheless, the legal precedents and legislative boilerplate for
separation exists, and it's not obvious why it wouldn't be applied in
event of a "ye" vote.

**On banking**: I'd like to refer everybody who's wondering about the
future of the big Scottish banks to the pressure coming from the Tory
back benches for a referendum on the UK exiting the EU. London is the
largest centre for Euro trades in the world, outstripping Frankfurt --
but only as long as the UK remains in the EU. There's considerable
domestic pressure in England for an EU exit, and a Scottish exit from
the EU will both weaken David Cameron personally *and* energize other
separatists.

It *is* important to note that RBS and BOS are not really "Scottish"
banks in any meaningful sense, other than being headquartered in
Edinburgh and having licenses to print banknotes: the majority of their
investment and trading arms operate throughout the UK. They are de facto
part of the British banking sector.

One sneaky option that I think Alex Salmond must have considered is to
offer the banks a replacement for the [Double Irish
arrangement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double_Irish_arrangement): in
other words, to position Scotland as a tax shelter wrt. the UK, in order
to retain their business. This might well work if Scotland opted for the
Euro rather than Sterling as a currency sharing arrangement -- although
this is basically an inadmissible option prior to the referendum (enough
people in Scotland are dubious about the Euro zone that it would kill
the "yes" campaign dead in the water). But by using the ECB to back RBoS
and BOS, and a tax shelter arrangement to make Scotland attractive,
Scotland could potentially seize a disproportionate chunk of the British
investment banking sector at or after separation while making it look
like an inevitable side-effect of Osborne's bloody-mindedness.

Another 5 year outcome that we can't really prognosticate about might
be: Scotland becomes independent, initially pegging a Scottish point
against Sterling. [EU accession is
fast-tracked](http://www.scotsman.com/news/politics/top-stories/independent-scotland-could-join-eu-in-18-months-1-3535302).
Some of the banks move a large chunk of their business south. There is a
UK general election and the Conservatives win: a referendum on EU exit
is held and the UK moves to exit the EU. Scotland transitions the
Scottish Pound peg to the Euro: the larger banks then move their
operations to Edinburgh and/or Frankfurt to retain access to the
Euro-zone. Upshot: by 2020 Scotland's banking sector is doing fine, it's
London that's in the tank.

I don't think this is a particularly likely outcome, but the state of
mind of rUK in the wake of a Scottish exit is just totally impossible to
predict from here. We're sailing into a fogbank, basically. And what
both sides are presenting as their Plan A, Plan B, and "There is no Plan
C" are clearly blinds concealing their top secret Plans D, E, and F.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
peteratjet](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958424)
| [September 9, 2014
14:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html#comment-1958436)
| [Reply](javascript:void(0); "Reply")

**137:**

You could be right. I've used helium-3 in the lab before (good NMR
nucleus), and I was told that it had come from weapons refurbishment,
but maybe they're doing things differently now.

Leave a comment
---------------

Here's the **[moderation
policy](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2008/06/moderation-policy.html)**.
If this is your first time, please read it before you post.

If you need to sign in and want to create a local account on this blog,
select "Movable Type" from the "Sign in ..." menu. You will need a
working email address.

Name

Email Address

URL

Remember personal info?

Comments (This form requires
[JavaScript](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript). You may use HTML
entities and formatting tags in comments.)

### Buy my Books

-   [US English
    editions](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-us.html)
-   [UK English
    editions](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-uk.html)
-   [Deutsche
    Ausgaben](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-de.html)
-   [日本語の本](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-jp.html)

### Quick Stuff

-   [**FAQ:** Who am
    I?](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/fiction/faq.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Moderation
    Policy](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2008/06/moderation-policy.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Why is there no
    tipjar?](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2009/03/reminder-why-theres-no-tipjar.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Copyright
    Notice](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/faq-copyright-and-fair-usagefa.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Inviting Charles Stross to
    speak](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2009/07/faq-inviting-charles-stross-to.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Fan
    Fiction](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2010/05/faq-fanfic.html)
-   [Bibliography and online
    fiction](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/fiction/online-fiction-by-charles-stro.html)
-   [Talk to me](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/who_am_i/foo.cgi)
-   [Non-blog writing (old)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/old/)

### Specials

-   **[Common Misconceptions About
    Publishing](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2010/04/common-misconceptions-about-pu-1.html)**—a
    series of essays about the industry I work in.
-   **[How I Got Here In The
    End](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2009/07/how-i-got-here-in-the-end-my-n.html)**—my
    non-writing autobiography, or what I did *before* becoming a
    full-time writer.
-   **[Unwirer](http://craphound.com/unwirer/)**—an experiment in weblog
    mediated collaborative fiction.
-   **[Shaping the
    Future](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2007/05/shaping-the-future.html)**—a
    talk I gave on the social implications of Moore's Law.
-   **[Japan: first
    impressions](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static//2007/11/japan-some-impressions.html)**
    — or, what I did on my holidays
-   **[Inside the MIT Media
    Lab](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/rants/inside-the-mit-media-lab.html)**—what
    it’s like to spend a day wandering around the Media Lab.
-   **[The High Frontier,
    Redux](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2007/06/the-high-frontier-redux.html)**
    — space colonization: feasible or futile?
-   **[“Nothing like this will be built
    again”](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/rants/nothing-like-this-will-be-buil.html)**—inside
    a nuclear reactor complex.
-   **[Old
    blog](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/old/blog-old/)**—2003-2006
    (RIP)

### Merchandise

### About this Entry

This page contains a single entry by [Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/) published on *September 8,
2014 11:58 AM*.

[New guest bloggers: Tricia Sullivan and Kameron
Hurley](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/new-guest-bloggers-tricia-sull.html)
was the previous entry in this blog.

[Drink Me: The Horror Hotel Story, and Where Ideas Come
From](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/horror-hotel-story.html)
is the next entry in this blog.

Find recent content on the [main
index](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/) or look in the
[archives](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/archives.html) to
find all content.

### Search this blog

### Propaganda

[![image](http://widgets.openrightsgroup.org/founding1000/since/223224.png)](http://www.openrightsgroup.org/)

### Categories

-   [Administrative
    (5)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/administrative/)
-   [Computers
    (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/computers/)
-   [Gadget Patrol
    (3)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/gadget-patrol/)
-   [Humour (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/humour/)
-   [News (4)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/news/)
-   [Politics
    (10)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/politics/)
-   [Publicity stuff
    (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/publicity-stuff/)
-   [Publishing
    (8)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/publishing/)
-   [Travel (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/travel/)
-   [Writing (15)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/writing/)

### Monthly [Archives](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/archives.html)

-   [September 2014
    (4)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/)
-   [August 2014
    (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/08/)
-   [July 2014
    (11)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/07/)
-   [June 2014
    (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/06/)
-   [May 2014 (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/05/)
-   [April 2014
    (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/04/)
-   [March 2014
    (10)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/03/)
-   [February 2014
    (19)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/02/)
-   [January 2014
    (14)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/01/)
-   [December 2013
    (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/12/)
-   [November 2013
    (10)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/11/)
-   [October 2013
    (11)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/10/)

[Earlier, and other types of
archive.](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/archives.html)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/09/the-referendum-question.html
