[Sign in](javascript:doLogin();) |
[Register](https://www.newcriterion.com/register.cfm)

[](/)

The New Criterion
=================

It operates as a refuge for a civilizing element in short supply in
contemporary America: honest criticism \
 - The Wall Street Journal

[](/subscriberservices.cfm "Subscribe now")

-   [iPad, PDF &
    ePub](http://www.newcriterion.com/ipadpdf.cfm "Current issue")
-   [Archive](http://www.newcriterion.com/archive.cfm "Browse archive")
-   [Blog](http://www.newcriterion.com/blogs.cfm "Blog")
-   [Events](http://www.newcriterion.com/events.cfm "Events")
-   [Webcasts](http://www.newcriterion.com/webcasts.cfm "Webcasts")
-   [Store](http://www.newcriterion.com/bookstore.cfm "Bookstore")
-   [Donate](https://www.newcriterion.com/donate.cfm "Become a friend")
-   [Friends](https://www.newcriterion.com/friends/ "Become a friend")
-   [About us](http://www.newcriterion.com/aboutus.cfm "About us")
-   [Reader
    services](https://www.newcriterion.com/subscriberservices.cfm "Reader services")

[![Franciscan
](/cm/images/banners/ban_s8UPBDk0g3.jpg)](http://www.newcriterion.com/adsys/adc.cfm?A=97&C=12 "Franciscan ")

\

Features
--------

-   [Incr](javascript:// "Text size") [Decr](javascript:// "Text size")
    [Reset](javascript:// "Text size")
-   [Make
    PDF](/articlepdf.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945 "Make PDF")
-   [Link](/articles.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945 "Link")
-   [Print](/articleprint.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945 "Print")
-   [email](javascript:ColdFusion.Window.show('emailto7945'); "email")
-   [[1]
    comment](/articles.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945#comments "[1] comment(s)")
-   

September 2014

Two takes on the Common Core

by [Sol Stern](/author.cfm?authorid=440), [Peter
Wood](/author.cfm?authorid=899)

Conservative arguments for and against the Common Core.

Burke

was right!

[Support The \
 New Criterion](/donate.cfm)

![image](http://f051314.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/o-classroom-apple-facebook.jpg)\
 [*via*](http://f051314.wordpress.com)

Editor’s note: The following essays have been adapted from Common Core:
Yea & Nay*, which will be published by Encounter Books this month.*

* * * * *

**Our conservative Core**\
 *by Sol Stern*

Many conservatives, perhaps a majority, now believe that the Common Core
State Standards are among the worst things ever to happen in American
education. And why wouldn’t they believe it? For the past three years
they have been bombarded by conservative media outlets and think tanks
with scary-sounding allegations that the Obama administration illegally
imposed the Common Core on the states and that the President’s power
grab is leading to a dumbed-down, leftist curriculum in the schools.

It’s understandable that conservatives who believe such tall tales would
want to see the education initiative they now call “Obama Core” rolled
back. Opposition to Common Core by the Tea Party and other activist
groups has the feel of a populist revolt. It has already succeeded in
pressuring many Republican candidates and elected officials to reject
the Standards. Indiana and Oklahoma have withdrawn from the Common Core
and the program is in peril in several other states.

Most recently, Governor Scott Walker of Wisconsin called on his state’s
legislature to dump Common Core and replace it “with standards set by
the people of Wisconsin.” Louisiana Governor and Republican presidential
candidate Bobby Jindal was for the Common Core before he was against it,
apparently because he suddenly discovered it was all part of an Obama
plot. This backtracking is a sure sign that support for Common Core has
become toxic for Republican candidates in the 2016 presidential
primaries.

But conservatives should be careful what they wish for. They could find
themselves held responsible for undermining the only education reform of
the past forty years with any chance of restoring traditional academic
content to the classroom. If the Common Core fails (and it might), we
will not soon discover better alternatives for the public schools, as
conservative activists imagine. Rather, Americans will remain stuck with
the vast wasteland of a public education system bereft of serious
academic standards and a coherent curriculum. The nation’s K–12 schools
will then continue turning out what Emory University Professor Mark
Bauerlein has called “The Dumbest Generation.”

One other likely result of Common Core failure is that the progressive
education movement, which has already inflicted great damage on the
schools, will retain its pervasive influence on what is taught (or
rather not taught) in America’s classrooms. Conservatives who help bring
down the Common Core will thus have given an unexpected gift to the
Left. Ironically, most leftists also oppose the Common Core, but at
least they’re smart enough to know that if the Common Core crashes,
progressive education ideology will still rule the classroom.

Regardless of whether one believes that the main threat to the Common
Core Standards emanates from the left or the right, its demise will harm
the country’s schools. As a conservative, I remain convinced that,
faults and all, the Common Core still presents a golden opportunity and
a challenge for states and school districts to rethink what is taught in
their classrooms. The Standards are more than just a list of learning
objectives and skills that American students are expected to achieve by
the end of each grade level. The most hopeful part of the new Standards
is that they reject the instructional malpractice that prevents the
public schools from fulfilling their historic mission of producing
literate American citizens who know something about their country’s
history and its republican heritage. Contrary to the conservatives’
complaints, the Common Core is, in fact, a document that the founders
would approve.

The Common Core is not a curriculum as many critics have falsely
claimed. But it emphatically calls for states and school districts to
implement the Standards with “a well-developed,**content-rich
curriculum.” Because of that instructional guideline, there is now at
least the possibility of a serious discussion in the schools about the
role of academic content knowledge and a coherent curriculum in raising
student achievement.

That’s a conversation that hasn’t taken place in American education for
almost half a century. It also means long-overdue recognition for the
prophetic warnings issued a quarter century ago about the calamities of
progressive education by E. D. Hirsch Jr., one of America’s greatest
thinkers on education—and also one of its most neglected. Proper
implementation of the Common Core will bring attention and support for
Hirsch’s Core Knowledge curriculum (it already has in a few states),
which is perfectly aligned with the Standards and has been proven to
raise the academic performance of poor children.

The problems that Hirsch addresses were already endemic to American
education by the 1960s, thanks to the progressive education movement
which ruled the system. Instead of teaching young children to read by
using the proven method of explicit phonics instruction, progressive
educators supported a teaching philosophy known as “whole language”
(later called “balanced literacy”). Instead of teaching “mere” facts,
teachers encouraged students to “construct” their own knowledge.
Progressives followed a “child-centered” instructional model based on
the assumption that all children were natural readers and writers. Thus,
with the right classroom environment and a helping hand from teachers,
children could be inspired to find their individual paths to literacy.

Hirsch was able to connect the dots between the ascendancy of
progressive education doctrines and the decline in the reading ability
of the nation’s schoolchildren. In *Cultural Literacy*, his bestselling
1985 book, Hirsch declared: “The unacceptable failure of our schools has
occurred not because our teachers are inept but chiefly because they are
compelled to teach a fragmented curriculum based on faulty education
theories.”

According to Hirsch, well-meaning school reformers who merely advocated
structural reforms—i.e. charters, vouchers, and accountability schemes
for teachers—ignored the most potent force for academic achievement. The
classroom was the “primal scene” of all education improvement, Hirsch
noted, and “the effort to develop a standard sequence of core knowledge
is, to put it bluntly, absolutely essential to effective educational
reform in the United States.”

While his ideas made him a pariah in many discussions about education
reform, when they are tested Hirsch is vindicated. You can see this
clearly by looking at what happened in New York State and New York City
in the years before and after the advent of the Common Core Standards.
The state was the first in the nation to sign on to the Standards and
did so with great enthusiasm. The city is the biggest school district in
the country, with 1,800 schools and 1 million plus students. Until the
Common Core, Gotham was a solid bastion of progressive education.

The city became a laboratory for examining the deformities of
progressive teaching when its schools came under mayoral control after
the election of Michael Bloomberg in 2001. With little background in
instructional issues, Mayor Bloomberg and his new Schools Chancellor
Joel Klein deferred most decision-making in the area of classroom
instruction to a cadre of veteran progressive educators, who in turn
championed the progressive “balanced-literacy” reading and writing
program developed by Professor Lucy Calkins of Columbia Teachers
College.

But balanced literacy proved to be an abject failure. The city’s
eighth-grade reading scores barely budged over twelve years, despite a
doubling of education spending—from $12 billion to $24 billion. There
was no narrowing of the racial achievement gap.

Recognizing the program’s meager results, Chancellor Klein set up a
three-year pilot program, matching ten elementary schools using the
Hirsch early-grade literacy curriculum against a demographically similar
cohort of ten schools that used balanced literacy. The children in the
Core Knowledge schools significantly outperformed those in the schools
using the Calkins approach. By the time he left the department in 2009,
Klein had become a supporter of Hirsch’s Core Knowledge curriculum, with
its focus on direct instruction and the teaching of broad content
knowledge.

The following year, New York State committed to implementing the new
Common Core Standards. Since Calkins’s balanced literacy was not
properly aligned to the new standards, particularly Common Core’s
emphasis on content knowledge, the progressive education program soon
was pushed to the margins. The state education department selected
Hirsch’s Core Knowledge Foundation to write a “content-rich curriculum”
as specified in the Standards for grades pre-K–12. The curriculum was
then posted on the state education department’s website and made
available for use by all schools in the state—though there was no
requirement for any school to choose the state-recommended curriculum.

The city’s education department followed suit. It made Core Knowledge
one of its recommended curricula for the early grades. Balanced literacy
was now left off the recommended list. Nevertheless, neither the state
nor city forced the schools to follow its curriculum recommendations.
Still, seventy-one city elementary schools chose the Core Knowledge
curriculum. It was the biggest leap ever for the Hirsch curriculum and a
portent of what might happen elsewhere if Common Core’s declaration in
favor of a content-knowledge curriculum were taken seriously by other
states.

Unfortunately, last year New York voters elected Bill de Blasio, a
political progressive, as their new mayor. He in turn brought back the
progressive educator Carmen Fariña—a friend, collaborator, and former
coworker of Calkins—as his new schools chancellor. It took all of six
months on the job for Fariña to declare that, Common Core Standards or
not, the pilot study proving the superior performance of Core Knowledge
or not, “balanced literacy” was coming back to city classrooms.

New York City is thus likely to become a major battlefield in a new
round of the reading wars, as well as a test of the meaning of the
Common Core. Can progressive education reclaim its hegemony in the city
or will the schools (at least some of them) choose an academically
serious curriculum for the children?

This poses a significant question for conservative education activists.
Will they continue fighting an ideological war over Common Core? Or will
they now see the Common Core, with all its faults, as a wedge to
counteract progressives like Fariña and Calkins who want to foist a
dumbed-down, unproven education program on the city’s 1 million
children? One would hope that, regardless of their original—and now
disproven—theories about Common Core and federal control, conservative
education reformers will support proper classroom instruction and an
academic curriculum that is each American child’s birthright.

Instead of trying to pull down this entire edifice, still full of
promise, conservative education activists ought to be exploring ways to
exploit the openings provided by the new Standards to restore a
coherent, knowledge-based curriculum to the public schools. That’s a
reform worth fighting for on behalf of all American children.

* * * * *

**Core deceptions**\
 *by Peter Wood*

The political fortunes of the Common Core are fast changing. When the
Common Core first caught public attention in early 2010, it seemed like
an unstoppable locomotive. It had the support of President Obama, and
within a matter of a few months forty states and the District of
Columbia had formally adopted it. Six more states soon followed.
Republican and Democratic governors endorsed it. The Common Core was
roaring ahead not just with bipartisan political support but with
widespread enthusiasm from teachers unions, the press, and much of the
D.C.–based education establishment.

As I write in the summer of 2014, the prospect is a bit different. That
locomotive is nowhere to be seen and may be lying on its side in a dry
gulch. The proponents of the Common Core are in retreat and fighting a
defensive battle. Their dream of a one-size-fits-all set of national
educational standards integrated with meaningful national tests is in
ruins. The best they can now hope for is a remnant of the original idea:
a handful of stalwart blue states that stick with the Core and a delayed
and then watered-down system of tests.

To say that the larger project has failed the test of political support
and public popularity, however, doesn’t necessarily mean that the Common
Core was a bad idea. Could Randi Weingarten, the president of the
American Federation of Teachers, be right when she says the Common Core
was a great idea marred by poor implementation? In a word, no.

The Common Core was never a good idea. It was a sneaky idea—and sneaky
ideas in American public policy tend to have exactly the lifespan that
Common Core has had. The main sneakiness of the Common Core is that it
was (and still is) presented as a state-level project. In reality, from
the get-go it was intended to be a national project. Its official name
is “The Common Core K–12 *State* Standards,” but the truth is that the
Common Core is designed to work as a de facto set of
*national*standards.

This isn’t the only sneakiness. The attempt to frame the Common Core as
a state-level project was motivated by the need to evade federal law and
Constitutional barriers to federal efforts to regulate public schools’
standards, curriculum, and testing.

The proponents of the Common Core insist, often vehemently, that it is
simply a set of “standards” and not a “curriculum.” It is, in fact, very
much a curriculum. The sneakiness in this case is again aimed at getting
around legal barriers that prohibit federal efforts to establish
curricula, but the sneakiness is also aimed at diverting teachers and
the public from the truth. The word “standards” suggests high-level
guidelines that allow schools and teachers to fill in the details. The
word “curriculum” suggests nuts-and-bolts specifications at the school
level. There is no sharp line that divides standards and curricula. The
more specific standards become, the more they look like a curriculum.
The Common Core standards are finely detailed, grade-by-grade
specifications for what should be taught, how it should be taught, and
when it should be taught. Proponents are right when they argue that this
still leaves room for teachers to do some things their own way, but that
doesn’t take account of the next layer of sneakiness: the tests.

Clearly, the Common Core is meant to be integrated with a set of tests.
The content of the exams, of course, inevitably drives what the teachers
teach. That’s because the teachers want their students to succeed, but
it is also because the teachers themselves will be rewarded or punished
on the basis of how well their students perform on the tests. So when
Common Core proponents say that the “standards” are just high-level
ideals and the schools and the teachers can decide for themselves the
actual content of the curriculum, those proponents are being sneaky.
They know full well that the teachers will have to “teach to the tests”
and that the tests will reinforce the Common Core’s top-down vision of
American education. The growing opposition from teachers and teachers
unions centers on this point.

The Common Core is profoundly a federal initiative. It is a federal
initiative dressed up as a collection of initiatives by the states, but
the real actors are the suits in Washington. In July 2009, President
Obama and Secretary of Education Arne Duncan announced Race to the Top
(RttT), the federally sponsored state education competition
incentivizing the adoption of Common Core. This was four months before
states had a look at the first draft of the standards and eleven months
before the standards were finished. Forty-one states applied for RttT
money in Phase 1 of applications, due January 2010. An early draft of
the standards had been released to the public just two months prior, and
the validation committee had met only once. (They would meet again twice
more to review new iterations of the standards.)

Phase 2 applications were due on June 1, 2010, the day that final Common
Core State Standards were released to the states and one day before the
standards were released to the public. In November and December 2011,
states had the opportunity to complete a two-part application for Phase
3 Race to the Top funding, just five months after the final standards
were made public.

The Common Core might well have attracted and held the attention of a
handful of states without Race to the Top, but it would clearly not have
gained anything like the formal support of forty-six states, nearly all
of which adopted it sight unseen as the price of a sweepstakes ticket
for Race to the Top funds.

As an exercise in lawmaking, the adoption of the Common Core by those
forty-six states stands as one of the worst examples of malfeasance in
modern American history. Within a matter of a few months, most Americans
were placed under a new nationalized educational regime they had no
share in creating and no opportunity to review. There were no bills,
hearings, or debates in Congress or in state legislatures. Many states
acted blindly in the hope that the RttT funds would be worth it at a
time of straitened state budgets. In most states, the matter was handled
directly by commissioners and boards of education. Democracy and
representative government blinked.

Of course it didn’t end there. A few states, notably Texas, resisted the
initial temptation to sign up. Others soon began to take the pig out of
the poke and didn’t like what they saw. As far as the “state” standards
being voluntary went, legislators and governors in states that had
buyer’s remorse soon found themselves threatened by Duncan, who held to
the view that they had no right to back out of the Common Core once
their states had opted in. In February 2012, Duncan called criticisms of
the Common Core State Standards “a conspiracy theory in search of a
conspiracy.” When South Carolina legislators awoke to the reality that
their state was expected to pay 90 percent of the costs of the Common
Core and began to look for the exits, Duncan derided them:

> I hope South Carolina lawmakers will heed the voices of teachers who
> supported South Carolina’s decision to stop lowering academic
> standards and set a higher bar for success. And I hope lawmakers will
> continue to support the state’s decision to raise standards, with the
> goal of making every child college- and career-ready in today’s
> knowledge economy.

Duncan has proceeded down this path by threatening other states that
have wavered in their loyalty to the Common Core. One weapon at Duncan’s
disposal is waivers from No Child Left Behind (NCLB). NCLB conveniently
left states vulnerable to a bizarre stipulation that by 2014 “100
percent” of their students would be proficient in math and reading.
This, of course, is an impossibility, but schools that fail to achieve
that impossibility lose their control of federal funding for
disadvantaged children. That’s a major budget item for most schools. The
Obama administration realized in 2011 that it could weaponize the NCLB
rule by promising waivers (unauthorized by Congress) for states it
favored and withholding them from other states. The administration went
further by breaking the waivers into multiple parts and granting partial
and temporary waivers. The Common Core is essentially a means of
educational leveling in the service of centralized state planning and a
progressive view of social justice.

But there are still other problems with the Common Core—the way it aims
to fundamentally transform what schooling is supposed to be. This issue
is easily obfuscated, as the standards don’t reveal themselves in narrow
quotation. For example, the Common Core State Standards for Reading
Literature in Grade 3 include:

> CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.3.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases as
> they are used in a text, distinguishing literal from nonliteral
> language.

It and many statements like it are bland, uncontroversial declarations.
To understand what the Common Core truly does to “reading” requires
working through hundreds of these standards and seeing how they work
together and relate to the larger picture. When it comes to “reading,”
the larger picture is that the Common Core puts a huge emphasis on
teaching children to read for “information.” In this alarming dictum,
the other purposes of reading fade away. Reading is at its heart
metaphoric. It teaches us to see things we otherwise couldn’t or
wouldn’t. It schools our emotions; it points to truths beyond itself;
alternatively, it conveys lies; it may possess beauty or it may be ugly;
it can cause us to ask questions that the text itself does not ask; it
possesses implications; it belongs to and participates in a larger
context; it taps into secret memories; it rallies us to public causes.

The Common Core can’t stop reading from doing all this, but it can make
all these things less likely for the average student. It does that by
putting literature in modest quantities in the primary grades and
tapering it off until by the end of high school it is a negligible part
of the curriculum. Poetry is especially hard hit. The Common Core
essentially puts imaginative literature on the far side of a hill and
leaves students mostly with what the standards writers call
“informational texts.” Works of literature that have endured for
generations (think of *Huckleberry Finn*) aren’t banished entirely but
fade into relative insignificance.

Worse, it presents most examples of important writing in the form of
excerpts and, still worse, it drastically plays down historical context.
The infamous example that critics of the Common Core often cite is
teaching the Gettysburg Address without explaining that it is a memorial
speech over the most important battlefield of the Civil War.

When the framers of the Constitution left education to the states and
localities they made a fateful decision about what kind of nation we
would become. We became a nation of restless experimenters, people with
local loyalties as well as broader connections, people with only so much
patience for education and what our betters had to say. It hasn’t always
worked out for the best. We make abundant mistakes as individuals and as
communities. We do, however, have a capacity for self-correction, and we
take pride in fixing what doesn’t work.

The Common Core rubs against those virtues in an unpleasant way. The
Common Core requires us to cede to others the diagnosis of where we have
gone wrong and what we must do to set things right. That’s demoralizing,
pretty much to everyone except the handful of central planners who are
in charge of the Common Core itself. *They* can be pretty happy as our
über-teachers, data wranglers, and custodians of social justice. The
rest of us feel, well, *manipulated*.

I don’t celebrate local control of schools as a glorious thing. I’ve
seen schools run into the ground by inept local control. I’ve seen many
other schools content in proud mediocrity. But state and local control
can also ignite excellence, and I prefer the chances it offers of that
to the dead certainty of the Common Core.

The Common Core came to us by means of deception. That’s an awfully
unpromising start for reforming something so vital as America’s schools.
Just maybe the basic premise is mistaken. We won’t squeeze better
educational “performance” from students by imposing a national regimen
of standards and tests, but will only breed a deeper alienation and
lassitude by taking away—or at least shrinking—the imaginative horizons
of students, parents, teachers, and the communities in which they live.

What is truly common and at the core of American life is our sense of
freedom and self-governance. The Common Core is at war with those
ideals, and that’s why it is a bad idea.

**Sol Stern** is a senior fellow at Manhattan Institute and contributing
editor of *City Journal.*

\
 [more from this
author](/author.cfm?AuthorID=440 "MORE FROM THIS AUTHOR")\
 \

**Peter Wood** is the president of the National Association of Scholars.

\
 [more from this
author](/author.cfm?AuthorID=899 "MORE FROM THIS AUTHOR")\
 \

This article originally appeared in The New Criterion, Volume 33
September 2014, on page 26

Copyright © 2014 The New Criterion |
[www.newcriterion.com](http://www.newcriterion.com)

[http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945]( "http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945")

\

-   [Incr](javascript:// "Text size") [Decr](javascript:// "Text size")
    [Reset](javascript:// "Text size")
-   [Make
    PDF](/articlepdf.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945 "Make PDF")
-   [Link](/articles.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945 "Link")
-   [Print](/articleprint.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945 "Print")
-   [email](javascript:ColdFusion.Window.show('emailto7945'); "email")
-   

E-mail to friend

[Sign in](javascript:doLogin();)

add a comment

Leave this field empty

  --------------- -- --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Name:              ![image](/CFFileServlet/_cf_captcha/_captcha_img2515389387654917296.png)
  Email:          
  Website:        
  Verification:   
  --------------- -- --------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

[![The New
Criterion](/cm/covers/331.jpg)](/cover.cfm?im=/cm/covers/331_large.jpg "The New Criterion")

By the author

[Aligned with
liberty](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Aligned-with-liberty-6272 "Aligned with liberty")

by [Sol Stern](/author.cfm?authorid=440)

[Anti-Semitic
symbiosis](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Anti-Semitic-symbiosis-5193 "Anti-Semitic symbiosis")

by [Sol Stern](/author.cfm?authorid=440)

A review of *Nazi Propganda in the Arab World* by Jeffrey Herf.

[Illogical
alliances](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Illogical-alliances-4198 "Illogical alliances")

by [Sol Stern](/author.cfm?authorid=440)

You might also enjoy

[Guilt trip: Versailles, avant-garde &
kitsch](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Guilt-trip--Versailles--avant-garde---kitsch-7942 "Guilt trip: Versailles, avant-garde & kitsch")

by [Roger Kimball](/author.cfm?authorid=10)

John Maynard Keynes’s revisionist history of World War I has had
enduring—and harmful—consequences.

[The minister of
paradox](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/The-minister-of-paradox-7943 "The minister of paradox")

by [Gary Saul Morson](/author.cfm?authorid=101)

The complicated, often conflicted, life of Alexander Herzen.

[Divide and
conquer](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Divide-and-conquer-7944 "Divide and conquer")

by [Marco Grassi](/author.cfm?authorid=47)

Summer exhibitions in Florence and Verona reconsider the work of
Pontormo, Rosso & Veronese.

Most popular

[1. What Jeff Koons has
wrought](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/What-Jeff-Koons-has-wrought-7950 "What Jeff Koons has wrought")

by [Eric Gibson](/author.cfm?authorid=68)

[2. The sum of its
parts](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/The-sum-of-its-parts-7955 "The sum of its parts")

by [David Guaspari](/author.cfm?authorid=957)

[3. Guilt trip: Versailles, avant-garde &
kitsch](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Guilt-trip--Versailles--avant-garde---kitsch-7942 "Guilt trip: Versailles, avant-garde & kitsch")

by [Roger Kimball](/author.cfm?authorid=10)

[4. Grounded
Zero](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Grounded-Zero-7952 "Grounded Zero")

by [James Panero](/author.cfm?authorid=16)

[5. Painting a false
portrait](http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Painting-a-false-portrait-7887 "Painting a false portrait")

by [Bruce Cole](/author.cfm?authorid=863)

[view more \>]( "More Articles")

[Follow @newcriterion](http://twitter.com/newcriterion)

Subscribe to our [newsletter](http://newcriterion.us7.list-manage.com/subscribe?u=56a6350302efcdcf51cb75af4&id=d9d835cf78)!
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\* indicates required

Email Address \*

First Name \*

Last Name \*

[![image](/img/poetryprize140ad.jpg)](http://www.newcriterion.com/bookstore.cfm?mode=poetry)

#### [Webcasts](http://www.newcriterion.com/webcasts.cfm)

**The Walter Duranty Prize for Journalistic Mendacity** \
On May 5, 2014, *The New Criterion* and PJ Media presented the second
[Walter Duranty Prize for Journalistic
Mendacity.](http://pjmedia.com/eddriscoll/2014/05/15/duranty-prize-2/)
The award is given to highlight egregious examples of dishonest
reporting. Also awarded this year was the Rather, a new award for
lifetime achievement in mendacious journalism. \
The Duranty Prize is named after Walter Duranty, the *New York Times*
Moscow corresponded in the 1920s and 1930s who whitewashed Joseph
Stalin’s forced starvation of the Ukrainians (the Holodomor) and many
other aspects of Soviet oppression. Duranty was awarded the Pulitzer
Prize in 1932 for his efforts. It has never been revoked. \
Audio copyright Ed Driscoll,
[www.eddriscoll.com.](http://www.eddriscoll.com)

\

**Introduction to The Kennedy Phenomenon** \
Roger Kimball introduces The Kennedy Phenomenon, a conference presented
by *The New Criterion* on Tuesday, November 19.

\

**The Kennedy Phenomenon: "Watching the Kennedy Train-Wreck"** \
Roger Kimball reads Peter Collier’s paper on oft-overlooked unsavory
details of the Kennedys' lives. Much of the paper is drawn from
Collier’s book, coauthored with David Horowitz, *[The Kennedys: An
American
Drama.](%20http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1893554317/thenewcriterio)*

Weblog

[![Weblog
banner](/img/weblog_banner.jpg)](http://www.newcriterion.com/blogs.cfm "Weblog banner title")

[In Case You Missed
It](http://www.newcriterion.com/blogs.cfm#In-Case-You-Missed-It-7589 "In Case You Missed It")

by [Christine Emba](/author.cfm?authorid=919)

Sep 12, 2014 01:04 PM

[Critic's Notebook for September 8,
2014](http://www.newcriterion.com/blogs.cfm#Critic-s-Notebook-for-September-8--2014-7588 "Critic's Notebook for September 8, 2014")

by [Brian P. Kelly](/author.cfm?authorid=822)

Sep 08, 2014 07:14 PM

[In Case You Missed
It](http://www.newcriterion.com/blogs.cfm#In-Case-You-Missed-It-7587 "In Case You Missed It")

by [Christine Emba](/author.cfm?authorid=919)

Sep 05, 2014 02:27 PM

#### [RSS feeds](http://www.newcriterion.com/rss.cfm "RSS feeds")

-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/ "Home")
-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/subscriberservices.cfm "Subscribe")
-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/aboutus.cfm "About Us")
-   [](https://www.newcriterion.com/donate.cfm "Donate")
-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/advertise.cfm "Advertise")
-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/aboutus.cfm#contact "Contact us")
-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/rss.cfm "RSS")
-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/auction "Art Auction")
-   [](http://www.newcriterion.com/bookstore.cfm?mode=poetry "Poetry Prize")

  -------------- -- --
  Copyright ©\      
  1982-2014         
  -------------- -- --

[Powered by www.ecomsolutions.net](http://www.ecomsolutions.net)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/Two-takes-on-the-Common-Core-7945
