### [current community](//programmers.stackexchange.com)

-   [chat](http://chat.stackexchange.com)
    [blog](http://programmers.blogoverflow.com)
    [](//programmers.stackexchange.com)
    Programmers
-   [](http://meta.programmers.stackexchange.com)
    Programmers Meta

### your communities

[Sign
up](https://programmers.stackexchange.com/users/signup?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fprogrammers.stackexchange.com%2fquestions%2f60774%2fmodel-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts)
or [log
in](https://programmers.stackexchange.com/users/login?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fprogrammers.stackexchange.com%2fquestions%2f60774%2fmodel-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts)
to customize your list.

### [more stack exchange communities](//stackexchange.com/sites)

[Stack
Exchange](//stackexchange.com "A list of all 131 Stack Exchange sites")

[sign
up](https://programmers.stackexchange.com/users/signup?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fprogrammers.stackexchange.com%2fquestions%2f60774%2fmodel-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts)
[log
in](https://programmers.stackexchange.com/users/login?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fprogrammers.stackexchange.com%2fquestions%2f60774%2fmodel-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts)
[tour](/tour) [help](# "Help Center and other resources")

-   [Tour Start here for a quick overview of the site](/tour)
-   [Help Center Detailed answers to any questions you might
    have](/help)
-   [Meta Discuss the workings and policies of this
    site](//meta.programmers.stackexchange.com)

\

[Programmers](/)

-   [Questions](/questions)
-   [Tags](/tags)
-   [Users](/users)
-   [Badges](/help/badges)
-   [Unanswered](/unanswered)

-   [Ask Question](/questions/ask)

[Take the 2-minute tour](/tour) ×

Programmers Stack Exchange is a question and answer site for
professional programmers interested in conceptual questions about
software development. It's 100% free, no registration required.

[Model-View-Presenter implementation thoughts](/questions/60774/model-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts)
=============================================================================================================

up vote 12 down vote
[favorite](# "This is a favorite question (click again to undo)")

**6**

I'm trying to get a good grasp of how to implement good decoupling
between a UI and the model, but I'm having trouble figuring out exactly
where to divide the lines.

I've been looking at Model-View-Presenter, but I'm not sure exactly how
to go about implementing it. For example, my View has multiple dialogs..

-   Should there be a View class with instances of each of the dialogs?
    Then in that case, how should the dialogs interact with the
    Presenter? ie. if an individual dialog needs to request data from
    the Model via the Presenter, how should the dialog get a reference
    to the Presenter? Via a reference to the View given to it during
    construction?
-   I was thinking maybe the view should be a static class? Then the
    dialogs GetView and get the Presenter from there...
-   I'd been thinking about setting it up the Presenter with ownership
    of the View and Model (as opposed to the View having the Presenter
    and Presenter having Model) and the Presenter registering callbacks
    for events in the View, but that makes it seem a lot more coupled
    (or language depended, at least.)

I'm trying to:

1.  make this as decoupled as possible
2.  ideally make it possible to couple the Presenter/Model with Views of
    other languages (I've not done a ton of inter-language stuff, but I
    know it's possible, particularly the more `void(void)` I can stick
    to, at least a C\# app with a C++ library...
3.  keep the code clean and simple

So.. any suggestions how the interactions should be handled?

[design-patterns](/questions/tagged/design-patterns "show questions tagged 'design-patterns'")
[ui](/questions/tagged/ui "show questions tagged 'ui'")
[interfaces](/questions/tagged/interfaces "show questions tagged 'interfaces'")

[share](/q/60774 "short permalink to this question")|[improve this
question](/posts/60774/edit)

[edited Mar 22 '11 at
16:08](/posts/60774/revisions "show all edits to this post")

[](/users/6419/philip-regan)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/892ef4994953820e31857adc7e0e9505?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[Philip Regan](/users/6419/philip-regan)\
 1,364817

asked Mar 22 '11 at 15:46

[](/users/20850/trycatch)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/eb4c403beaa8a8fc6445f27ee7bb3575?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[trycatch](/users/20850/trycatch)\
 565516

  -- --
     
  -- --

Have you looked at this article?:
[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model-view-presenter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model-view-presenter)
– [Bernard](/users/15389/bernard "7910 reputation") Mar 22 '11 at 16:05

  -- --
     
  -- --

I have.. I found it a bit quick and high level, I'm looking to
understand better how to handle multiple dialogs in a large project with
as little coupling as possible.. –
[trycatch](/users/20850/trycatch "565 reputation") Mar 22 '11 at 16:25

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

4 Answers 4
-----------

[active](/questions/60774/model-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts?answertab=active#tab-top "Answers with the latest activity first")
[oldest](/questions/60774/model-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts?answertab=oldest#tab-top "Answers in the order they were provided")
[votes](/questions/60774/model-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts?answertab=votes#tab-top "Answers with the highest score first")

up vote 17 down vote accepted

Welcome to a slippery slope. You've by this point realized that there is
an endless variation of all the model-view interactions. MVC,
MVP(Taligent, Dolphin, Passive View), MVVM just to name a few.

The Model View Presenter pattern, like most architectural patterns is
open to a lot of variety and experimentation. The one thing all the
variations have in common is the role of the presenter as a "middleman"
between the view and the model. The two most common are the *Passive
View* and the *Supervising Presenter/Controller* -
[[Fowler](http://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/)]. *Passive View* treats the
UI as a very shallow interface between the user and the presenter. It
contains very little if any logic, delegating as much responsibility to
a presenter. *Supervising Presenter/Controller* tries to take advantage
of the data binding built into many UI frameworks. The UI handles data
synchronization but presenter/controller steps in for more complex
logic. In either case the model, view and presenter form a triad

There are many ways to do this. Its very common to see this handled by
treating each dialog/form as a different view. Many times there's a 1:1
relationship between views and presenters. This isn't a hard, fast rule.
Its quite common to have one presenter handle multiple related views or
vice versa. It all depends on the complexity of the view and the
complexity of the business logic.

As for how views and presenters obtain a reference to each other, this
is sometimes called *wiring*. You have three choices:

**View holds a reference to presenter**\
 A form or dialog implements a view. The form has event handlers that
delgate to a presenter using direct function calls:

    MyForm.SomeEvent(Sender)
    {
      Presenter.DoSomething(Sender.Data);
    }

Since the presenter doesn't have a reference to the view, the view has
to send it data as arguments. The presenter can communicate back to the
view by using events/callback functions which the view must listen for.

**Presenter holds a reference to view**\
 In the scenario the view exposes properties for the data it displays to
the user. The presenter listens for events and manipulates the
properties on the view:

    Presenter.SomeEvent(Sender)
    {
      DomainObject.DoSomething(View.SomeProperty);
      View.SomeOtherProperty = DomainObject.SomeData;
    }

**Both hold a reference to each other forming a circular dependency**\
 This scenario is actually easier to work with than the others. The view
responds to events by calling methods in the presenter. The presenter
read/modifies data from the view through exposed properties.

    View.SomeEvent(Sender)
    {
      Presenter.DoSomething();
    }

    Presenter.DoSomething()
    {
      View.SomeProperty = DomainObject.Calc(View.SomeProperty);
    }

There are other issues to be considered with the MVP patterns. Creation
order, object lifetime, where the wiring takes place, communication
among MVP triads but this answer has grown long enough already.

[share](/a/60845 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/60845/edit)

answered Mar 22 '11 at 20:15

[](/users/4890/kenneth-cochran)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/0a9d0aadd049fa597a20fe4274e8d1b9?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[Kenneth Cochran](/users/4890/kenneth-cochran)\
 852314

  -- --
     
  -- --

This is definitely helpful. Communication between the triads and
lifetime is where I'm currently having trouble now that I'm grasping
some of this. – [trycatch](/users/20850/trycatch "565 reputation") Mar
23 '11 at 13:31

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

up vote 3 down vote

As everyone has said, there are dozens of opinions and not any single
one of them is right or wrong. Without getting into the myriad of
patterns and only focusing on MVP here's some suggestions on
implementation.

Keep them separated. The view should implement an interface which forms
the bond between the view and presenter. The view creates a presenter
and injects itself into the presenter and exposes the methods it offers
up for the presenter to interact with the view. The view is responsible
for implementing these methods or properties any way it wants. Generally
you have one view : one presenter but in some cases you can have many
views : one presenter (web, wpf, etc.). The key here is that the
presenter knows nothing of UI implementations and only interacts with
the view through the interface.

Here's an example. First we have a view class with a simple method to
display a message to the user:

    interface IView
    {
      public void InformUser(string message);
    }

Now here's the presenter. Note that the presenter takes in a IView into
its constructor.

    class Presenter
    {
      private IView _view;
      public Presenter(IView view)
      {
        _view = view;
      }
    }

Now here's the actual user interface. This could be a window, a dialog,
a web page, etc. Doesn't matter. Note the constructor for the view will
create the presenter by injecting itself into it.

    class View : IView
    {
      private Presenter _presenter;

      public View()
      {
        _presenter = new Presenter(this);
      }

      public void InformUser(string message)
      {
        MessageBox.Show(message);
      }
    }

The presenter doesn't care about how the view implements the method it
just does. For all the presenter knows, it could be writing to a log
file and not even showing it to the user.

In any case, the presenter does some work with the model on the back end
and at some point wants to inform the user about what's going on. So now
we have a method somewhere in the presenter that calls out to the views
InformUser message.

    class Presenter
    {
      public void DoSomething()
      {
        _view.InformUser("Starting model processing...");
      }
    }

This is where you get your decoupling. The presenter only holds a
reference to an implementation of IView and doesn't really care how it's
implemented.

This is also a poor mans implementation as you do have a reference to
the Presenter in the view and objects are set via constructors. In a
more robust solution you would probably want to look at inversion of
control (IoC) containers like Windsor, Ninject, etc. that would resolve
the implementation of the IView for you at runtime on-demand and thus
making it even more decoupled.

[share](/a/61506 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/61506/edit)

answered Mar 24 '11 at 13:47

[](/users/10601/bil)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/ccd2cb208bf8f9e680d5a96ba5f62065?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[Bil](/users/10601/bil)\
 26016

  -- --
     
  -- --

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

up vote 1 down vote

I think it's important to remember that the Controller/Presenter is
where the action really takes place. Coupling in the Controller is
inevitable because of necessity.

The core point of the Controller is so that if you make a change to the
View, then Model doesn't have to change and *vice versa* (if the Model
changes the View doesn't have to either) because the Controller is what
translates the Model into the View and back again. But the Controller
will change when either Model or the View changes do because you
effectively have to translate within the Controller how the Model is to
Viewed how to get changes made in the View back into the Mode.

The best example I can give is that when I write an MVC app, I am able
to not only have data in the GUI view, but I can also write a routine
that pushes data pulled from the Model into a `string` to be shown in
the debugger (and by extension into a plain text file). If I can take
Model data and translate it freely into text without changing the View
or the Model and *only* the Controller, then I am on the right path.

That being said, you will have to have references between the different
components to make it all work. The Controller needs to know about the
View to push data, the View needs to know about the Controller to tell
it when a change has been made (like when the User clicks "Save" or
"New..."). The Controller needs to know about the Model to pull the
data, but I would argue that the Model shouldn't know about anything
else.

*Caveat:* I come from a totally Mac, Objective-C, Cocoa background which
really pushes you into the MVC paradigm whether you want to or not.

[share](/a/60778 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/60778/edit)

[edited Mar 22 '11 at
16:09](/posts/60778/revisions "show all edits to this post")

\

answered Mar 22 '11 at 16:02

[](/users/6419/philip-regan)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/892ef4994953820e31857adc7e0e9505?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[Philip Regan](/users/6419/philip-regan)\
 1,364817

  -- --
     
  -- --

This is definitely my goal. My main problem is how to set up the View -
whether it should be a class with an instance of each dialog, and then
use View.Getters which call Dialog.Getters, or if the Presenter should
be able to call Dialog.Getters directly (this seems too tightly coupled,
so probably not?) – [trycatch](/users/20850/trycatch "565 reputation")
Mar 22 '11 at 16:10

  -- --
     
  -- --

I think the Presenter/Controller should be fully responsible for the
Views, so the latter. Again, some coupling is bound to happen, but at
least if the direction of responsibility is clear, then maintenance
should be easier in the long run. – [Philip
Regan](/users/6419/philip-regan "1364 reputation") Mar 22 '11 at 16:13

  --- --
  2   
  --- --

I certainly agree the P/C should be responsible for the View, but I
thought part what was supposed to make MVP powerful was the ability to
pull the entire UI library out and plug a new one in and with some
massaging (dllimporting and whatnot) be able to run another one in it's
place. Wouldn't this be more difficult with the Controller/Presenter
accessing the dialogs directly? I'm certainly not trying to argue, just
further understand :) –
[trycatch](/users/20850/trycatch "565 reputation") Mar 22 '11 at 16:22

  -- --
     
  -- --

I think the real power comes from two directions: The first being that
the View and the Model don't have anything to do with other, and the
second that the majority of development work, the app's engine, is done
in a neatly-contained unit, the Controller. But some bleeding of
responsibility is bound to happen. At least the majority of swapping of
interfaces will be done in the Controller and any linking from the View
would be minimum. As others have said, some bleeding of logic is
expected and allowed. MVC isn't a magic bullet. – [Philip
Regan](/users/6419/philip-regan "1364 reputation") Mar 22 '11 at 18:14

  -- --
     
  -- --

The important point for decoupling is that presenter ONLY accesses view
through well defined interfaces (UI library independent), so that is how
UI library can be replaced for another one (another one that will
implement the same interface for
form/window/dialog/page/control/whatever) –
[Thetam](/users/48607/thetam "101 reputation") Feb 27 '12 at 16:03

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

up vote 1 down vote

In general, you want your model to encapsulate all the interactions with
that model. For example, your CRUD actions (Create, Read, Update,
Delete) are all part of the model. The same goes for special
calculations. There's a couple good reasons for this:

-   It's easier to automate your testing for this code
-   It keeps all that important stuff in one place

In your controller (MVC app), all you are doing is collecting the models
you need to use in your view, and calling the appropriate functions on
the model. Any changes to the model's state happens in this layer.

Your View simply displays the models that you prepared. Essentially, the
view only reads the model and adjusts its output accordingly.

**Mapping the general principle to actual classes**

Perhaps [this blog
article](http://blog.vuscode.com/malovicn/archive/2007/12/18/model-view-presenter-mvp-vs-model-view-controller-mvc.aspx)
will help to understand some of the differences between MVC and MVP.

Remember that your dialogs are views. If you already have a dialog
class, there is no reason to create another "View" class. The Presenter
layer essentially binds the model to the controls in the View. The
business logic and all important data is stored in the model.

[share](/a/60784 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/60784/edit)

answered Mar 22 '11 at 16:21

[](/users/6509/berin-loritsch)

![image](http://i.stack.imgur.com/rfNOW.jpg?s=32&g=1)

[Berin Loritsch](/users/6509/berin-loritsch)\
 19.1k23587

  -- --
     
  -- --

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

Your Answer
-----------

draft saved

draft discarded

### Sign up or [log in](/users/login?returnurl=%2fquestions%2f60774%2fmodel-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts%23new-answer)

Sign up using Google

Sign up using Facebook

Sign up using Stack Exchange

### Post as a guest

Name

Email required, but not shown

### Post as a guest

Name

Email required, but not shown

[discard](#)

By posting your answer, you agree to the [privacy
policy](http://stackexchange.com/legal/privacy-policy) and [terms of
service](http://stackexchange.com/legal/terms-of-service).

Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged [design-patterns](/questions/tagged/design-patterns "show questions tagged 'design-patterns'") [ui](/questions/tagged/ui "show questions tagged 'ui'") [interfaces](/questions/tagged/interfaces "show questions tagged 'interfaces'") or [ask your own question](/questions/ask).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

asked

**3 years ago**

viewed

**9819 times**

active

**[3 years ago](?lastactivity "2011-03-24 13:47:12Z")**

#### Related

[](/q/61258 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

1

[Model-view-presenters and user-interactions involving separate
dialogs](/questions/61258/model-view-presenters-and-user-interactions-involving-separate-dialogs)

[](/q/63068 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

0

[Building a table (DataGridView) while keeping decoupled from
Model](/questions/63068/building-a-table-datagridview-while-keeping-decoupled-from-model)

[](/q/69342 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

4

[How to show someone of the power of model-view-controller design
pattern?](/questions/69342/how-to-show-someone-of-the-power-of-model-view-controller-design-pattern)

[](/q/112617 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

4

[When should the presentation model design pattern include one or more
controllers?](/questions/112617/when-should-the-presentation-model-design-pattern-include-one-or-more-controller)

[](/q/123199 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

1

[Organizing large Javascript applications - The view
layer](/questions/123199/organizing-large-javascript-applications-the-view-layer)

[](/q/142095 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

0

[Model View Presenter for WebForms and
Winforms](/questions/142095/model-view-presenter-for-webforms-and-winforms)

[](/q/150843 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

6

[Given the presentation model pattern, is the view, presentation model,
or model responsible for adding child views to an existing view at
runtime?](/questions/150843/given-the-presentation-model-pattern-is-the-view-presentation-model-or-model)

[](/q/207560 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

4

[How to handle complex views (consisting of several parts) in MVC web
application](/questions/207560/how-to-handle-complex-views-consisting-of-several-parts-in-mvc-web-application)

[](/q/224424 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

3

[Loose Coupling Presenter to View in
MVP](/questions/224424/loose-coupling-presenter-to-view-in-mvp)

[](/q/243129 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

1

[How to present a stable data model in a public API that allows internal
data structures to be changed without breaking the public view of the
data?](/questions/243129/how-to-present-a-stable-data-model-in-a-public-api-that-allows-internal-data-str)

#### [Hot Network Questions](//stackexchange.com/questions?tab=hot)

-   [Login and Register in one
    form](http://ux.stackexchange.com/questions/64128/login-and-register-in-one-form)
-   [Why is iPhone adding a '1' to my phone numbers when sending a
    text?](http://apple.stackexchange.com/questions/144699/why-is-iphone-adding-a-1-to-my-phone-numbers-when-sending-a-text)
-   [Why is this limit statement
    false?](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/925514/why-is-this-limit-statement-false)
-   [Does order matter when writing a sentence including aunt and
    uncle?](http://english.stackexchange.com/questions/195605/does-order-matter-when-writing-a-sentence-including-aunt-and-uncle)
-   [What is the reason for creating
    IEnumerator?](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/25743959/what-is-the-reason-for-creating-ienumerator)
-   [Where does the extra kinetic energy come from in a gravitational
    slingshot?](http://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/134473/where-does-the-extra-kinetic-energy-come-from-in-a-gravitational-slingshot)
-   [What was Rav's relationship to R'
    Hiyyah?](http://judaism.stackexchange.com/questions/45305/what-was-ravs-relationship-to-r-hiyyah)
-   [How did cyclists get over curbs before BMX
    era?](http://bicycles.stackexchange.com/questions/24597/how-did-cyclists-get-over-curbs-before-bmx-era)
-   [why do spokes
    break?](http://bicycles.stackexchange.com/questions/24604/why-do-spokes-break)
-   [Success in maths (soft
    question)](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/925506/success-in-maths-soft-question)
-   [Is the filename of a shapefile the same as its Feature Class
    name?](http://gis.stackexchange.com/questions/113255/is-the-filename-of-a-shapefile-the-same-as-its-feature-class-name)
-   [Can the 5E abjurer wizard recover temp hp on his arcane ward any
    time it is below max or only when it reaches
    0?](http://rpg.stackexchange.com/questions/47617/can-the-5e-abjurer-wizard-recover-temp-hp-on-his-arcane-ward-any-time-it-is-belo)
-   [I am looking for a word for an abstainer from red
    meat](http://english.stackexchange.com/questions/195671/i-am-looking-for-a-word-for-an-abstainer-from-red-meat)
-   [Creating Phil Taylor the darts champion in D&D
    5e](http://rpg.stackexchange.com/questions/47573/creating-phil-taylor-the-darts-champion-in-dd-5e)
-   [Can't find mistake in an easy
    proof.](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/924931/cant-find-mistake-in-an-easy-proof)
-   [Can I scratch off the magnetic strip off a debit card to only allow
    chip and
    PIN?](http://security.stackexchange.com/questions/66977/can-i-scratch-off-the-magnetic-strip-off-a-debit-card-to-only-allow-chip-and-pin)
-   [Do ants or other insects sleep, and if so
    why?](http://biology.stackexchange.com/questions/21159/do-ants-or-other-insects-sleep-and-if-so-why)
-   [Why is it so expensive to produce cameras for non visible
    light?](http://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/128289/why-is-it-so-expensive-to-produce-cameras-for-non-visible-light)
-   [Is a plasma necessarily made of monoatomic
    ions?](http://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/134723/is-a-plasma-necessarily-made-of-monoatomic-ions)
-   [Ground Control Station for
    UAVs](http://aviation.stackexchange.com/questions/8521/ground-control-station-for-uavs)
-   [How to cook Lo
    Mein?](http://cooking.stackexchange.com/questions/46998/how-to-cook-lo-mein)
-   [What is the right word to refer to a black person, when you don't
    know their
    name?](http://ell.stackexchange.com/questions/32976/what-is-the-right-word-to-refer-to-a-black-person-when-you-dont-know-their-nam)
-   [new Date() set to 31 december 2014 says 1st december
    instead](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/25741647/new-date-set-to-31-december-2014-says-1st-december-instead)
-   [Do I mention a competing offer when negotiating a
    raise?](http://workplace.stackexchange.com/questions/33457/do-i-mention-a-competing-offer-when-negotiating-a-raise)

[more hot questions](#)

[question
feed](/feeds/question/60774 "feed of this question and its answers")

![image](/posts/60774/ivc/e237)

[tour](/tour) [help](/help) [badges](/help/badges)
[blog](http://programmers.blogoverflow.com?blb=1)
[chat](http://chat.stackexchange.com)
[data](http://data.stackexchange.com)
[legal](http://stackexchange.com/legal) [privacy
policy](http://stackexchange.com/legal/privacy-policy) [work
here](http://stackexchange.com/work-here) [advertising
info](http://stackexchange.com/mediakit) mobile **[contact
us](/contact)**
**[feedback](http://meta.programmers.stackexchange.com)**

Technology

Life / Arts

Culture / Recreation

Science

Other

1.  [Stack
    Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com "professional and enthusiast programmers")
2.  [Server
    Fault](http://serverfault.com "professional system and network administrators")
3.  [Super
    User](http://superuser.com "computer enthusiasts and power users")
4.  [Web
    Applications](http://webapps.stackexchange.com "power users of web applications")
5.  [Ask Ubuntu](http://askubuntu.com "Ubuntu users and developers")
6.  [Webmasters](http://webmasters.stackexchange.com "pro webmasters")
7.  [Game
    Development](http://gamedev.stackexchange.com "professional and independent game developers")
8.  [TeX -
    LaTeX](http://tex.stackexchange.com "users of TeX, LaTeX, ConTeXt, and related typesetting systems")

1.  [Programmers](http://programmers.stackexchange.com "professional programmers interested in conceptual questions about software development")
2.  [Unix &
    Linux](http://unix.stackexchange.com "users of Linux, FreeBSD and other Un*x-like operating systems.")
3.  [Ask Different
    (Apple)](http://apple.stackexchange.com "power users of Apple hardware and software")
4.  [WordPress
    Development](http://wordpress.stackexchange.com "WordPress developers and administrators")
5.  [Geographic Information
    Systems](http://gis.stackexchange.com "cartographers, geographers and GIS professionals")
6.  [Electrical
    Engineering](http://electronics.stackexchange.com "electronics and electrical engineering professionals, students, and enthusiasts")
7.  [Android
    Enthusiasts](http://android.stackexchange.com "enthusiasts and power users of the Android operating system")
8.  [Information
    Security](http://security.stackexchange.com "Information security professionals")

1.  [Database
    Administrators](http://dba.stackexchange.com "database professionals who wish to improve their database skills and learn from others in the community")
2.  [Drupal
    Answers](http://drupal.stackexchange.com "Drupal developers and administrators")
3.  [SharePoint](http://sharepoint.stackexchange.com "SharePoint enthusiasts")
4.  [User
    Experience](http://ux.stackexchange.com "user experience researchers and experts")
5.  [Mathematica](http://mathematica.stackexchange.com "users of Mathematica")
6.  [more (14)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#technology)

1.  [Photography](http://photo.stackexchange.com "professional, enthusiast and amateur photographers")
2.  [Science Fiction &
    Fantasy](http://scifi.stackexchange.com "science fiction and fantasy enthusiasts")
3.  [Graphic
    Design](http://graphicdesign.stackexchange.com "Graphic Design professionals, students, and enthusiasts")
4.  [Seasoned Advice
    (cooking)](http://cooking.stackexchange.com "professional and amateur chefs")
5.  [Home
    Improvement](http://diy.stackexchange.com "contractors and serious DIYers")
6.  [Personal Finance &
    Money](http://money.stackexchange.com "people who want to be financially literate")
7.  [Academia](http://academia.stackexchange.com "academics and those enrolled in higher education")
8.  [more (10)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#lifearts)

1.  [English Language &
    Usage](http://english.stackexchange.com "linguists, etymologists, and serious English language enthusiasts")
2.  [Skeptics](http://skeptics.stackexchange.com "scientific skepticism")
3.  [Mi Yodeya
    (Judaism)](http://judaism.stackexchange.com "those who base their lives on Jewish law and tradition and anyone interested in learning more")
4.  [Travel](http://travel.stackexchange.com "road warriors and seasoned travelers")
5.  [Christianity](http://christianity.stackexchange.com "committed Christians, experts in Christianity and those interested in learning more")
6.  [Arqade
    (gaming)](http://gaming.stackexchange.com "passionate videogamers on all platforms")
7.  [Bicycles](http://bicycles.stackexchange.com "people who build and repair bicycles, people who train cycling, or commute on bicycles")
8.  [Role-playing
    Games](http://rpg.stackexchange.com "gamemasters and players of tabletop, paper-and-pencil role-playing games")
9.  [more (21)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#culturerecreation)

1.  [Mathematics](http://math.stackexchange.com "people studying math at any level and professionals in related fields")
2.  [Cross Validated
    (stats)](http://stats.stackexchange.com "people interested in statistics, machine learning, data analysis, data mining, and data visualization")
3.  [Theoretical Computer
    Science](http://cstheory.stackexchange.com "theoretical computer scientists and researchers in related fields")
4.  [Physics](http://physics.stackexchange.com "active researchers, academics and students of physics")
5.  [MathOverflow](http://mathoverflow.net "professional mathematicians")
6.  [more (7)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#science)

1.  [Stack
    Apps](http://stackapps.com "apps, scripts, and development with the Stack Exchange API")
2.  [Meta Stack
    Exchange](http://meta.stackexchange.com "meta-discussion of the Stack Exchange family of Q&A websites")
3.  [Area
    51](http://area51.stackexchange.com "proposing new sites in the Stack Exchange network")
4.  [Stack Overflow Careers](http://careers.stackoverflow.com)

site design / logo © 2014 stack exchange inc; user contributions
licensed under [cc by-sa
3.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) with [attribution
required](http://blog.stackoverflow.com/2009/06/attribution-required/)

rev 2014.9.9.1835

Programmers Stack Exchange works best with JavaScript
enabled![image](http://pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-c1rF4kxgLUzNc.gif)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/60774/model-view-presenter-implementation-thoughts
