Mixins, Forwarding, and Delegation in JavaScript
================================================

[via raganwald.com](/)
----------------------

* * * * *

### preface: where did the prototypes go?

This essay discusses how to separate JavaScript domain properties from
object behaviour, *without prototypes*. This is deliberate. By examining
four basic ways to have one object define the behaviour of other
objects, we gain insight into what we’re trying to accomplish at a very
basic level.

We can then take this insight to working with prototypes and understand
the conveniences that prototypes provide as well as the tradeoffs that
they make. That does not mean, of course that just because prototypes
(or classes, for that matter) are not mentioned here, that prototypes
are considered inferior to any of these techniques.

This is an essay, not a style guide.

Why metaobjects?
----------------

It is technically possible to write software using objects alone. When
we need behaviour for an object, we can give it methods by binding
functions to keys in the object:

    var sam = {
      firstName: 'Sam',
      lastName: 'Lowry',
      fullName: function () {
        return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
      },
      rename: function (first, last) {
        this.firstName = first;
        this.lastName = last;
        return this;
      }
    }

We call this a “naïve” object. It has state and behaviour, but it lacks
division of responsibility between its state and its behaviour.

This lack of separation has two drawbacks. First, it intermingles
properties that are part of the model domain (such as `firstName`), with
methods (and possibly other properties, although none are shown here)
that are part of the implementation domain. Second, when we needed to
share common behaviour, we could have objects share common functions,
but does it not scale: There’s no sense of organization, no clustering
of objects and functions that share a common responsibility.

Metaobjects solve the lack-of-separation problem by separating the
domain-specific properties of objects from their behaviour and
implementation-specific properties.

The basic principle of the metaobject is that we separate the mechanics
of behaviour from the domain properties of the base object. This has
immediate engineering benefits, and it’s also the foundation for
designing programs with higher-level constructs like formal classes,
expectations, and delegation.

* * * * *

Mixins, Forwarding, and Delegation
----------------------------------

The simplest possible metaobject in JavaScript is a *mixin*. Consider
our naïve object:

    var sam = {
      firstName: 'Sam',
      lastName: 'Lowry',
      fullName: function () {
        return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
      },
      rename: function (first, last) {
        this.firstName = first;
        this.lastName = last;
        return this;
      }
    }

We can separate its domain properties from its behaviour:

    var sam = {
      firstName: 'Sam',
      lastName: 'Lowry'
    };

    var person = {
      fullName: function () {
        return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
      },
      rename: function (first, last) {
        this.firstName = first;
        this.lastName = last;
        return this;
      }
    };

And use `extend` to mix the behaviour in:

    var __slice = [].slice;

    function extend () {
      var consumer = arguments[0],
          providers = __slice.call(arguments, 1),
          key,
          i,
          provider,
          except;

      for (i = 0; i < providers.length; ++i) {
        provider = providers[i];
        except = provider['except'] || [];
        except.push('except');
        for (key in provider) {
          if (except.indexOf(key) < 0 && provider.hasOwnProperty(key)) {
            consumer[key] = provider[key];
          };
        };
      };
      return consumer;
    };

    extend(sam, person);

    sam.rename
      //=> [Function]

This allows us to separate the behaviour from the properties in our
code. If we want to use the same behaviour with another object, we can
do that:

    var peck = {
      firstName: 'Sam',
      lastName: 'Peckinpah'
    };

    extend(peck, person);

Our `person` object is a *template*, it provides some functionality to
be mixed into an object with a function like `extend`. Using templates
does not require copying entire functions around, each object gets
references to the functions in the template.

Things get even better: You can use more than one template with the same
object:

    var hasCareer = {
      career: function () {
        return this.chosenCareer;
      },
      setCareer: function (career) {
        this.chosenCareer = career;
        return this;
      }
    };

    extend(peck, hasCareer);
    peck.setCareer('Director');

We say that there is a *many-to-many* relationship between objects and
templates.

### scope and coupling

Consider a design that has four kinds of templates, we’ll call them `A`,
`B`, `C`, and `D`. Objects in the system might mix in one, two, three,
or all four templates. There are fifteen such “kinds” of objects, those
that mix in `A`, `B`, `AB`, `C`, `AC`, `BC`, `ABC`, `D`, `AD`, `BD`,
`ABD`, `CD`, `ACD`, `BCD`, and `ABCD`.

When you make a change to and one template, say `A`, you have to
consider how that change will affect each of the eight kinds of objects
that mixes `A` in. In only one of those, `A`, do you just consider `A`’s
behaviour by itself. In `AB`, `ABC`, `ABD`, and `ABCD`, you have to
consider how changes to `A` may interact with `B`, because they both
share access to each object’s private state. Same for `A` and `C`, and
`A` and `D`, of course.

By itself this is not completely revelatory: When objects interact with
each other in the code, there are going to be dependencies between them,
and you have to manage those dependencies.

Encapsulation solves this problem by strictly limiting the scope of
interaction between objects. If object `a` invokes a method `x()` on
object `b`, we know that the scope of interaction between `a` and `b` is
strictly limited to the method `x()`. We also know that any change in
state it may create is strictly limited to the object `b`, because `x()`
cannot reach back and touch `a`’s private state.

(There is some simplification going on here as we are ignoring
parameters and/or the possibility that `a` is part of `b`’s private
state)

However, two methods `x()` and `y()` on the same object are tightly
coupled by default, because they both interact with all of the object’s
private state. When we write an object like this:

    var counter = {
      _value: 0,
      value: function () {
        return this._value;
      },
      increment: function () {
        ++this._value;
        return this;
      },
      decrement: function () {
        --this._value;
        return this;
      }
    }

We fully understand that `value()`, `increment()`, and `decrement()` are
coupled, and they are all together in our code next to each other.

Whereas, if we write:

    function isanIncrementor (object) {
      object.increment = function () {
        ++this._value;
        return this;
      };
      return object;
    }

    // ...hundreds of lines of code...

    function isaDecrementor (object) {
      object.decrement = function () {
        --this._value;
        return this;
      };
      return object;
    }

Our two templates are tightly coupled to each other, but not obviously
so. They just ‘happen’ to use the same property. And they might never be
both mixed into the same object. Or perhaps they might. Who knows?

The technical term for templates referring to an object’s private
properties is [open
recursion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_recursion#Open_recursion).
It is powerful and flexible, in exactly the same sense that having
objects refer to each other’s internal properties is powerful and
flexible.

And just as objects can encapsulate their own private state, so can
templates.

### templates with private properties

Let’s revisit our `hasCareer` template:

    var hasCareer = {
      career: function () {
        return this.chosenCareer;
      },
      setCareer: function (career) {
        this.chosenCareer = career;
        return this;
      }
    };

`hasCareer` stores its private state in the object’s `chosenCareer`
property. As we’ve seen, that introduces coupling if any other method
touches `chosenCareer`. What we’d like to do is make `chosenCareer`
private. Specifically:

1.  We wish to store a copy of `chosenCareer` for each object that uses
    the `hasCareer` template. Mark Twain is a writer, Sam Peckinpah is a
    director.
2.  `chosenCareer` must not be a property of each person object, because
    we don’t want other methods accessing it and becoming coupled.

We have a few options. The very simplest, and most “native” to
JavaScript, is to use a closure.

### privacy through closures

We’ll write our own [functional
mixin](https://javascriptweblog.wordpress.com/2011/05/31/a-fresh-look-at-javascript-mixins/):

    function HasPrivateCareer (obj) {
      var chosenCareer;

      obj.career = function () {
        return chosenCareer;
      };
      obj.setCareer = function (career) {
        chosenCareer = career;
        return this;
      };
      return obj;
    }

    HasPrivateCareer(peck);

`chosenCareer` is a variable within the scope of the `hasCareer`, so the
`career` and `setCareer` methods can both access it through lexical
scope, but no other method can or ever will.

This approach works well for simple cases. It only works for named
variables. We can’t, for example, write a function that iterates through
all of the private properties of this kind of functional mixin, because
they aren’t properties, they’re variables. In the end, we have privacy,
but we achieve it by not using properties at all.

### privacy through objects

Another way to achieve privacy in templates is to write them as methods
that operate on `this`, but sneakily make `this` refer to a different
object. Let’s revisit our `extend` function:

    function extendPrivately (receiver, template) {
      var methodName,
          privateProperty = Object.create(null);

      for (methodName in template) {
        if (template.hasOwnProperty(methodName)) {
          receiver[methodName] = template[methodName].bind(privateProperty);
        };
      };
      return receiver;
    };

We don’t need to embed variables and methods in our function, it creates
one private variable (`privateProperty`), and then uses `.bind` to
ensure that each method is bound to that variable instead of to the
receiver object being extended with the template.

Now we can extend any object with any template, ‘privately:’

    extendPrivately(twain, hasCareer);
    twain.setCareer('Author');
    twain.career()
      //=> 'Author'

Has it modified `twain`’s properties?

    twain.chosenCareer
      //=> undefined

No. `twain` has `.setCareer` and `.career` methods, but `.chosencareer`
is a property of an object created when `twain` was privately extended,
then bound to each method using
[`.bind`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Function/bind).

The advantage of this approach over closures is that the template and
the mechanism for mixing it in are separate: You just write the
template’s methods, you don’t have to carefully ensure that they access
private state through variables in a closure.

### another way to achieve privacy through objects

In our scheme above, we used `.bind` to create methods bound to a
private object before mixing references to them into our object. There
is another way to do it:

    function forward (receiver, methods, toProvider) {
      methods.forEach(function (methodName) {
        receiver[methodName] = function () {
          return toProvider[methodName].apply(toProvider, arguments);
        };
      });

      return receiver;
    };

This function *forwards* methods to another object. Any other object, it
could be a metaobject specifically designed to define behaviour, or it
could be a domain object that has other responsibilities.

Dispensing with a lot of mixins, here is a very simple example example.
We start with some kind of investment portfolio object that has a
`netWorth` method:

    var portfolio = {
      _investments: [],
      addInvestment: function (investment) {
        this._investments.push(investment);
        return this;
      },
      netWorth: function () {
        return this._investments.reduce(
          function (acc, investment) {
            return acc + investment.value;
          },
          0
        );
      }
    };

And next we create an investor who has this portfolio of investments:

    var investor = {
      //...
    }

What if we want to make investments and to know an investor’s net worth?

    forward(investor, ['addInvestment', 'netWorth'], portfolio);

We’re saying “Forward all requests for `addInvestment` and `netWorth` to
the portfolio object.”

### forwarding

Forwarding is a relationship between an object that receives a method
invocation receiver and a provider object. They may be peers. The
provider may be contained by the consumer. Or perhaps the provider is a
metaobject.

When forwarding, the provider object has its own state. There is no
special binding of function contexts, instead the consumer object has
its own methods that forward to the provider and return the result. Our
`forward` function above handles all of that, iterating over the
provider’s properties and making forwarding methods in the consumer.

The key idea is that when forwarding, the provider object handles each
method *in its own context*. This is very similar to the effect of our
solution with `.bind` above, but not identical.

Because there is a forwarding method in the consumer object and a
handling method in the provider, the two can be varied independently.
Here’s a snippet of our `forward` function from above:

    consumer[methodName] = function () {
      return toProvider[methodName].apply(toProvider, arguments);
    }

Each forwarding function invokes the method in the provider *by name*.
So we can do this:

    portfolio.netWorth = function () {
      return "I'm actually bankrupt!";
    }

We’re overwriting the method in the `portfolio` object, but not the
forwarding function. So now, our `investor` object will forward
invocations of `netWorth` to the new function, not the original. This is
not how our `.bind` system worked above.

That makes sense from a “metaphor” perspective. With our
`extendPrivately` function above, we are creating an object as a way of
making private state, but we don’t think of it as really being a
first-class entity unto itself. We’re mixing those specific methods into
a consumer.

Another way to say this is that mixing in is “early bound,” while
forwarding is “late bound:” We’ll look up the method when it’s invoked.

### summarizing what we know so far

So now we have three things: Mixing in a template; mixing in a template
with private state for its methods (“Private Mixin”); and forwarding to
a first-class object. And we’ve talked all around two questions:

1.  Is the mixed-in method being early-bound? Or late-bound?
2.  When a method is invoked on a receiving object, is it evaluated in
    the receiver’s context? Or in the metaobject’s state’s context?

If we make a little table, each of those three things gets its own spot:

                             *Early-bound*   *Late-bound*
  -------------------------- --------------- --------------
  **Receiver’s context**     Mixin           
  **Metaobject’s context**   Private Mixin   Forwarding

So… What goes in the missing spot? What is late-bound, but evaluated in
the receiver’s context?

### delegation

Let’s build it. Here’s our `forward` function, modified to evaluate
method invocation in the receiver’s context:

    function delegate (receiver, methods, toProvider) {
      methods.forEach(function (methodName) {
        receiver[methodName] = function () {
          return toProvider[methodName].apply(receiver, arguments);
        };
      });

      return receiver;
    };

This new `delegate` function does exactly the same thing as the
`forward` function, but the function that does the delegation looks like
this:

    function () {
      return toProvider[methodName].apply(receiver, arguments);
    }

It uses the receiver as the context instead of the provider. This has
all the same coupling implications that our mixins have, of course. And
it layers in additional indirection. The indirection gives us some late
binding, allowing us to modify the metaobject’s methods *after* we have
delegated behaviour from a receiver to it.

### delegation vs. forwarding

Delegation and forwarding are both very similar. One metaphor that might
help distinguish them is to think of receiving an email asking you to
donate some money to a worthy charity.

-   If you *forward* the email to a friend, and the friend donates
    money, the friend is donating their own money and getting their own
    tax receipt.
-   If you *delegate* responding to your accountant, the accountant
    donates *your* money to the charity and you receive the tax receipt.

In both cases, the other entity does the work when you receive the
email.

* * * * *

Later Binding
-------------

When comparing Mixins to Delegation (and comparing Private Mixins to
Forwarding), we noted that the primary difference is that Mixins are
early bound and Delegation is late bound. Let’s be specific. Given:

    var counter = {};

    var Incrementor = {
      increment: function () {
        ++this._value;
        return this;
      },
      value: function (optionalValue) {
        if (optionalValue != null) {
          this._value = optionalValue;
        }
        return this._value;
      }
    };

    extend(counter, Incrementor);

We are mixing `Incrementor` into `counter`. At some point later, we
encounter:

    counter.value(42);

What function handles the invocation of `.value`? because we mixed
`Incrementor` into `counter`, it’s the same function as
`Incrementor.counter`. We don’t look that up when `counter.value(42)` is
evaluated, because that was bound to `counter.value` when we extended
`counter`. This is early binding.

However, given:

    var counter = {};

    delegate(counter, ['increment', 'value'], Incrementor);

    // ...time passes...

    counter.value(42);

We again are most likely invoking `Incrementor.value`, but now we are
determining this *at the time `counter.value(42)` is evaluated*. We
bound the target of the delegation, `Incrementor`, to `counter`, but we
are going to look the actual property of `Incrementor.value` up when it
is invoked. This is late binding, and it is useful in that we can make
some changes to `Incrementor` after the delegation has been set up,
perhaps to add some logging.

It is very nice not to have to do things like this in a very specific
order: When things have to be done in a specific order, they are
*coupled in time*. Late binding is a decoupling technique.

### but wait, there’s more

But we can get *even later than that*. Although the specific function is
late bound, the target of the delegation, `Incrementor`, is early bound.
We can late bind that too! Here’s a variation on `delegate`:

    function delegateToOwn (receiver, methods, propertyName) {
      methods.forEach(function (methodName) {
        receiver[methodName] = function () {
          var toProvider = receiver[propertyName];
          return toProvider[methodName].apply(receiver, arguments);
        };
      });

      return receiver;
    };

This function sets things up so that an object can delegate to one of
its own properties. Let’s take another look at the investor example.
First, we’ll set up our portfolio to separate behaviour from properties
with a standard mixin:

    var HasInvestments = {
      addInvestment: function (investment) {
        this._investments.push(investment);
        return this;
      },
      netWorth: function () {
        return this._investments.reduce(
          function (acc, investment) {
            return acc + investment.value;
          },
          0
        );
      }
    };

    var portfolio = extend({_investments: []}, HasInvestments);

Next we’ll make that a property of our investor, and delegate to the
property, not the object itself:

    var investor = {
      // ...
      nestEgg: portfolio
    }

    delegateToOwn(investor, ['addInvestment', 'netWorth'], 'nestEgg');

Our `investor` object delegates the `addInvestment` and `netWorth`
methods to its own `nestEgg` property. So far, this is just like the
`delegate` method above. But consider what happens if we decide to
assign a new portfolio to our investor:

    var retirementPortfolio = {
      _investments: [
        {name: 'IRA fund', worth: '872,000'}
      ]
    }

    investor.nestEgg = retirementPortfolio;

The `delegateToOwn` delegation now delegates to the new portfolio,
because it is bound to the property name, not to the original object.
This seems questionable for portfolios–what happens to the old portfolio
when you assign a new one?–but has tremendous application for modeling
classes of behaviour that change dynamically.

### state machines

A very common use case for this delegation is when building [finite
state machines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine). As
described in the book [Understanding the Four Rules of Simple
Design](https://leanpub.com/4rulesofsimpledesign) by Corey Haines, you
*could* implement [Conway’s Game of
Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life) using if
statements. Hand waving furiously over other parts of the system, you
might get:

    var Universe = {
      // ...
      numberOfNeighbours: function (location) {
        // ...
      }
    };

    var thisGame = extend({}, Universe);

    var Cell = {
      alive: function () {
        return this._alive;
      },
      numberOfNeighbours: function () {
        return thisGame.numberOfNeighbours(this._location);
      },
      aliveInNextGeneration: function () {
        if (this.alive()) {
          return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
        }
        else {
          return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 2 || this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
        }
      }
    };

    var someCell = extend({
      _alive: true,
      _location: {x: -15, y: 12}
    }, Cell);

One of the many insights from [Understanding the Four Rules of Simple
Design](https://leanpub.com/4rulesofsimpledesign) is that this business
of having an `if (alive())` in the middle of a method is a hint that
cells are stateful.

We can extract this into a state machine using delegation to a property:

    var Alive = {
      alive: function () {
        return true;
      },
      aliveInNextGeneration: function () {
        return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
      }
    };

    var Dead = {
      alive: function () {
        return false;
      },
      aliveInNextGeneration: function () {
        return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 2 || this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
      }
    };

    var FsmCell = {
      numberOfNeighbours: function () {
        return thisGame.numberOfNeighbours(this._location);
      }
    }

    delegateToOwn(Cell, ['alive', 'aliveInNextGeneration'], '_state');

    var someFsmCell = extend({
      _state: Alive,
      _location: {x: -15, y: 12}
    }, FsmCell);

`someFsmCell` delegates `alive` and `aliveInNextGeneration` to its
`_state` property, and you can change its state with assignment:

    someFsmCell._state = Dead;

In practice, states would be assigned en masse, but this demonstrates
one of the simplest possible state machines. In the wild, most business
objects are state machines, sometimes with multiple, loosely coupled
states. Employees can be:

-   In or out of the office;
-   On probation, on contract, or permanent;
-   Part time or full time.

Delegation to a property representing state takes advantage of late
binding to break behaviour into smaller components that have cleanly
defined responsibilities.

### late bound forwarding

The exact same technique can be used for forwarding to a property, and
forwarding to a property can also be used for some kinds of state
machines. Forwarding to a property has lower coupling than delegation,
and is preferred where appropriate.

* * * * *

Summary
-------

We’ve seen four techniques for separating object behaviour from object
properties:

1.  Mixins
2.  Private Mixins
3.  Forwarding
4.  Delegation

We’ve also seen how to implement “later binding” delegation by
delegating or forwarding to an object property, and how this can be used
for building a state machine. We’ve seen how these four techniques can
be understood to implement two orthogonal ideas: Early versus late
binding, and whether methods are evaluated in the receiver’s context or
the metaobject’s context.

We deliberately haven’t discussed prototypes or the things you can build
with prototypes (like classes). Instead, we take our understanding
gleaned from these prototype-less techniques to help us understand what
prototypes offer and what tradeoffs they make.

(discuss on [hacker news](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7566879)
and
[reddit](http://www.reddit.com/r/javascript/comments/22p3ex/mixins_forwarding_and_delegation_in_javascript/))

[Follow @raganwald](https://twitter.com/raganwald)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

\
\
 Generated by [GitHub Pages](http://pages.github.com) from a [public
repo](https://github.com/raganwald/raganwald.github.com). [Pull
requests](https://github.com/raganwald/raganwald.github.com/pulls) and
[issues](https://github.com/raganwald/raganwald.github.com/issues) are
welcome.\
 Tactile theme by [Jason Long](http://twitter.com/jasonlong).

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://raganwald.com/2014/04/10/mixins-forwarding-delegation.html
