[igvita.com](/) **|** a goal is a dream with a deadline [about](/)

Rails 3 Internals: Railtie & Creating Plugins
=============================================

By [Ilya Grigorik](/) on **August 04, 2010**

![image](//1-ps.googleusercontent.com/s/www.igvita.com/posts/10/xrails3.png.pagespeed.ic.npOyESwan4.png)With
the official Rails 3 release [on the
horizon](http://weblog.rubyonrails.org/2010/7/26/rails-3-0-release-candidate),
all of the edge features we have been hearing about for over a year are
about to become the new standard, and it has definitely been worth the
wait. One of the primary goals of the *"big refactor"* has been to
modularize Rails to allow other frameworks to easily extend or entirely
replace any of the previously *"critical"* components (ActiveRecord,
ActionMailer, etc). At the centre of all this, is the new Railtie logic,
which pieces all of these modules together.

Getting started with Railtie
----------------------------

The [documentation for
Railtie](http://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/Rails/Railtie.html) is a
great place to get started, but the interesting observation is that each
of the major Rails components (Action Mailer/Controller/View/Record) is
itself a Railtie, and Rails as you know it is simply [pieced
together](http://github.com/rails/rails/blob/master/railties/lib/rails/generators/rails/app/templates/config/application.rb#L8)
by requiring all of the independent components. Even better, if your
plugin or gem needs to hook into the Rails initialization process, all
you need to do is inherit from Railtie and you are ready to go!

So how does Railtie know to call your classes and initializers? Railtie
[defines](http://github.com/rails/rails/blob/master/railties/lib/rails/railtie.rb#L138)
a [self.inherited](http://ruby-doc.org/core/classes/Class.html#M002785)
method, which is called anytime a subclass of Railtie is created, and
stashes a reference to this class in a
[@subclasses](http://github.com/rails/rails/blob/master/railties/lib/rails/railtie.rb#L135)
variable. From there, the framework can simply call
[Railtie.subclasses](http://github.com/rails/rails/blob/master/railties/lib/rails/application/railties.rb#L16)
and perform all the initialization as usual - a clever use of the Ruby
object model.

Creating a Rails 3 plugin: 0-60
-------------------------------

As a result of the refactor, creating Rails 3 plugins is at least
several orders of magnitude simpler. In fact, as a simple exercise, lets
create a custom notification plugin to print all of the internal Rails
logging by also hooking into the new [Rails::Notification
API](http://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Notifications.html):

    module NewPlugin
      # namespace our plugin and inherit from Rails::Railtie
      # to get our plugin into the initialization process
      class Railtie < Rails::Railtie

        # configure our plugin on boot. other extension points such
        # as configuration, rake tasks, etc, are also available
        initializer "newplugin.initialize" do |app|

          # subscribe to all rails notifications: controllers, AR, etc.
          ActiveSupport::Notifications.subscribe do |*args|
            event = ActiveSupport::Notifications::Event.new(*args)
            puts "Got notification: #{event.inspect}"
          end

        end
      end
    end

[![image](//1-ps.googleusercontent.com/s/www.igvita.com/posts/10/xslowgrowl.png.pagespeed.ic.bOH9WgVPdg.jpg)](http://github.com/igrigorik/slowgrowl)Believe
it or not, that is a fully functional Rails 3 plugin, in 10 lines of
code. Simply drop this file into your load path and require it in your
application. In fact, you can bundle this file into a gem, ship it to
Gemcutter and with the help of
[Bundler](http://github.com/carlhuda/bundler), all your users have to do
is specify `gem 'ournew-plugin'` in their Gemfile, and the rest is taken
care of. With a little more imagination, and fun, we can extend our
example above into a
'[slowgrowl](http://github.com/igrigorik/slowgrowl)' plugin, which will
- you guessed it - growl at the developer anytime it detects a slow code
path in your app! Hat tip to [Gavin
Stark](http://hasmanyquestions.wordpress.com/2010/01/17/let-your-sql-growl-in-rails-3/)
for the idea.

Getting started with Rails 3
----------------------------

Railtie while an important piece of Rails 3, is hardly the only
component worth looking into. Also read up on the changes in
[ActiveRecord](http://m.onkey.org/2010/1/22/active-record-query-interface),
the [new
router](http://www.engineyard.com/blog/2010/the-lowdown-on-routes-in-rails-3/),
watch the [summary
screencasts](http://rubyonrails.org/screencasts/rails3) on the Rails
site, and make sure to check out one of the many great
[Railscasts](http://railscasts.com/tags/27) on the topic by Ryan Bates.
It has been worth the wait, Rails 3 is easily head and shoulders above
the competition.

![Ilya
Grigorik](https://1-ps.googleusercontent.com/s/www.igvita.com/images/35x35xigrigorik-small.png.pagespeed.ic._Nz4w6PPkg.jpg)**Ilya
Grigorik** is a web performance engineer and developer advocate at
Google, where his focus is on making the web fast and driving adoption
of performance best practices — [learn more](/), follow on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/igrigorik) (29K),
[Google+](https://plus.google.com/+IlyaGrigorik) (18K).

[View
Comments](http://www.igvita.com/2010/08/04/rails-3-internals-railtie-creating-plugins/#disqus_thread),
share on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/share?url=http://www.igvita.com/2010/08/04/rails-3-internals-railtie-creating-plugins/&text=Rails%203%20Internals:%20Railtie%20&%20Creating%20Plugins:&via=igrigorik),
[Google+](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://www.igvita.com/2010/08/04/rails-3-internals-railtie-creating-plugins/).

### High-Performance Browser Networking (O'Reilly)

What every web developer must know about networking and browser
performance: impact of latency and bandwidth, TCP, UDP, and TLS
optimization, performance tips for mobile networks, and an under the
hood look at performance of HTTP 1.1/2.0, XMLHttpRequest, WebSocket,
WebRTC, DataChannel, and other transports.

[Read Online for
Free](http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000545?utm_source=igvita&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=igvita-footer)

© 2005-2014 Ilya Grigorik [about](/)[subscribe via
rss](http://feeds.igvita.com/igvita)

(function(){var
e=window,f=Math,g="round",h="performance";e.pagespeed=e.pagespeed||{};var
q=e.pagespeed;
q.getResourceTimingData=function(){if(e[h]&&(e[h].getEntries||e[h].webkitGetEntries)){for(var
r=0,s=0,k=0,t=0,l=0,u=0,m=0,v=0,n=0,w=0,p=0,c={},d=e[h].getEntries?e[h].getEntries():e[h].webkitGetEntries(),b=0;b

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://www.igvita.com/2010/08/04/rails-3-internals-railtie-creating-plugins/
