### [current community](//stackoverflow.com)

-   [chat](http://chat.stackoverflow.com)
    [blog](http://blog.stackoverflow.com)
    [](//stackoverflow.com)
    Stack Overflow
-   [](http://meta.stackoverflow.com)
    Meta Stack Overflow
-   [](//careers.stackoverflow.com?utm_source=stackoverflow.com&utm_medium=site-ui&utm_campaign=multicollider)
    Careers 2.0

### your communities

[Sign
up](https://stackoverflow.com/users/signup?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fstackoverflow.com%2fquestions%2f21291712%2fwhen-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur)
or [log
in](https://stackoverflow.com/users/login?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fstackoverflow.com%2fquestions%2f21291712%2fwhen-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur)
to customize your list.

### [more stack exchange communities](//stackexchange.com/sites)

[Stack
Exchange](//stackexchange.com "A list of all 128 Stack Exchange sites")

[sign
up](https://stackoverflow.com/users/signup?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fstackoverflow.com%2fquestions%2f21291712%2fwhen-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur)
[log
in](https://stackoverflow.com/users/login?returnurl=https%3a%2f%2fstackoverflow.com%2fquestions%2f21291712%2fwhen-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur)
[tour](/tour) [help](# "Help Center and other resources")

-   [Tour Start here for a quick overview of the site](/tour)
-   [Help Center Detailed answers to any questions you might
    have](/help)
-   [Meta Discuss the workings and policies of this
    site](//meta.stackoverflow.com)

[careers 2.0](//careers.stackoverflow.com)

\

[Stack Overflow](/)

-   [Questions](/questions)
-   [Tags](/tags)
-   [Users](/users)
-   [Badges](/help/badges)
-   [Unanswered](/unanswered)

-   [Ask Question](/questions/ask)

[Take the 2-minute tour](/tour) ×

Stack Overflow is a question and answer site for professional and
enthusiast programmers. It's 100% free, no registration required.

[When manipulating immutable datastructures, what's the difference between Clojure's assoc-in and Haskell's lenses?](/questions/21291712/when-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur)
========================================================================================================================================================================================================================

up vote 12 down vote
[favorite](# "This is a favorite question (click again to undo)")

**2**

I need to manipulate and modify deeply nested immutable collections
(maps and lists), and I'd like to better understand the different
approaches. These two libraries solve more or less the same problem,
right? How are they different, what types of problem is one approach
more suitable for over the other?

[Clojure's
`assoc-in`](http://clojuredocs.org/clojure_core/1.2.0/clojure.core/assoc-in)\
 [Haskell's
`lens`](http://www.haskellforall.com/2013/05/program-imperatively-using-haskell.html)

[haskell](/questions/tagged/haskell "show questions tagged 'haskell'")
[clojure](/questions/tagged/clojure "show questions tagged 'clojure'")
[functional-programming](/questions/tagged/functional-programming "show questions tagged 'functional-programming'")
[immutability](/questions/tagged/immutability "show questions tagged 'immutability'")
[lens](/questions/tagged/lens "show questions tagged 'lens'")

[share](/q/21291712 "short permalink to this question")|[improve this
question](/posts/21291712/edit)

asked Jan 22 at 19:05

[](/users/20003/dustin-getz)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/8c8dd2e41a62328fe8502000bc5a45ca?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[Dustin Getz](/users/20003/dustin-getz)\
 8,66134893

  -- --
     
  -- --

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

4 Answers 4
-----------

[active](/questions/21291712/when-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur?answertab=active#tab-top "Answers with the latest activity first")
[oldest](/questions/21291712/when-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur?answertab=oldest#tab-top "Answers in the order they were provided")
[votes](/questions/21291712/when-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur?answertab=votes#tab-top "Answers with the highest score first")

up vote 16 down vote

Clojure's `assoc-in` lets you specify a path through a nested data
struture using integers and keywords and introduce a new value at that
path. It has partners `dissoc-in`, `get-in`, and `update-in` which
remove elements, get them without removal, or modify them respectively.

Lenses are a particular notion of bidirectional programming where you
specify a linkage between two data sources and that linkage lets you
reflect transformations from one to the other. In Haskell this means
that you can build lenses or lens-like values which connect a whole data
structure to some of its parts and then use them to transmit changes
from the parts to the whole.

There's an analogy here. If we look at a use of `assoc-in` it's written
like

    (assoc-in whole path subpart)

and we might gain some insight by thinking of the `path` as a lens and
`assoc-in` as a lens combinator. In a similar way you might write (using
the Haskell `lens` package)

    set lens subpart whole

so that we connect `assoc-in` with `set` and `path` with `lens`. We can
also complete the table

    set          assoc-in
    view         get-in
    over         update-in
    (unneeded)   dissoc-in       -- this is special because `at` and `over`
                                 -- strictly generalize dissoc-in

* * * * *

That's a start for similarities, but there's a huge dissimilarity, too.
In many ways, `lens` is far more generic than the `*-in` family of
Clojure functions are. Typically this is a non-issue for Clojure because
most Clojure data is stored in nested structures made of lists and
dictionaries. Haskell uses many more custom types very freely and its
type system reflects information about them. Lenses generalize the
`*-in` family of functions because they works smoothly over that far
more complex domain.

First, let's embed Clojure types in Haskell and write the `*-in` family
of functions.

    type Dict a = Map String a

    data Clj 
      = CljVal             -- Dynamically typed Clojure value, 
                           -- not an array or dictionary
      | CljAry  [Clj]      -- Array of Clojure types
      | CljDict (Dict Clj) -- Dictionary of Clojure types

    makePrisms ''Clj

Now we can use `set` as `assoc-in` almost directly.

    (assoc-in whole [1 :foo :bar 3] part)

    set ( _CljAry  . ix 1 
        . _CljDict . ix "foo" 
        . _CljDict . ix "bar" 
        . _CljAry  . ix 3
        ) part whole

This somewhat obviously has a lot more syntactic noise, but it denotes a
higher degree of explicitness about what the "path" into a datatype
means, in particular it denotes whether we're descending into an array
or a dictionary. We could, if we wanted, eliminate some of that extra
noise by instantiating `Clj` in the Haskell typeclass `Ixed`, but it's
hardly worth it at this point.

Instead, the point to be made is that `assoc-in` is applying to a very
particular kind of data descent. It's more general than the types I laid
out above due to Clojure's dynamic typing and overloading of `IFn`, but
a very similar fixed structure like that could be embedded in Haskell
with little further effort.

Lenses can go much further though, and do so with greater type safety.
For instance, the example above is actually not a true "Lens" but
instead a "Prism" or "Traversal" which allows the type system to
statically identify the possibility of failing to make that traversal.
It will force us to think about error conditions like that (even if we
choose to ignore them).

Importantly that means that we can be sure when we have a *true* lens
that datatype descent cannot fail—that kind of guarantee is impossible
to make in Clojure.

We can define custom data types and make custom lenses which descend
into them in a typesafe fashion.

    data Point = 
      Point { _latitude  :: Double
            , _longitude :: Double
            , _meta      :: Map String String }
      deriving Show

    makeLenses ''Point

    > let p0 = Point 0 0
    > let p1 = set latitude 3 p0
    > view latitude p1
    3.0
    > view longitude p1
    0.0
    > let p2 = set (meta . ix "foo") "bar" p1
    > preview (meta . ix "bar") p2
    Nothing
    > preview (meta . ix "foo") p2 
    Just "bar"

We can also generalize to Lenses (really Traversals) which target
multiple similar subparts all at once

    dimensions :: Lens Point Double

    > let p3 = over dimensions (+ 10) p0
    > get latitude p3
    10.0
    > get longitude p3
    10.0
    > toListOf dimensions p3
    [10.0, 10.0]

Or even target simulated subparts which don't actually exist but still
form an equivalent description of our data

    eulerAnglePhi   :: Lens Point Double
    eulerAngleTheta :: Lens Point Double
    eulerAnglePsi   :: Lens Point Double

* * * * *

Broadly, Lenses generalize the kind of path-based interaction between
whole values and subparts of values that the Clojure `*-in` family of
functions abstract. You can do a lot more in Haskell because Haskell has
a much more developed notion of types and Lenses, as first class
objects, widely generalize the notions of getting and setting that are
simply presented with the `*-in` functions.

[share](/a/21293171 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/21293171/edit)

[edited Jan 22 at
21:45](/posts/21293171/revisions "show all edits to this post")

\

answered Jan 22 at 20:22

[](/users/476408/j-abrahamson)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/75fa5e3b14c68e02e4f5799aa2ec64d1?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[J. Abrahamson](/users/476408/j-abrahamson)\
 29.8k24385

  -- --
     
  -- --

by `modify-in` do you mean `update-in`? –
[noisesmith](/users/2258453/noisesmith "7289 reputation") Jan 22 at
21:44

  -- --
     
  -- --

Yup, thanks for the catch. – [J.
Abrahamson](/users/476408/j-abrahamson "29824 reputation") Jan 22 at
21:45

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

![image](//cdn.sstatic.net/stackoverflow/img/apple-touch-icon.png)

Did you find this question interesting? Try our newsletter
----------------------------------------------------------

Sign up for our newsletter and get our top new questions delivered to
your inbox ([see an
example](http://stackexchange.com/newsletters/newsletter?site=stackoverflow.com)).

up vote 7 down vote

You're talking about very two different things.

You can use lens to solve similar problems as assoc-in, where you're
using collection types (`Data.Map`, `Data.Vector`) that match the
semantics but there are differences.

In untyped languages like Clojure it's common to structure your domain
data in terms of collections that have non-static contents (hash-maps,
vectors, etc) even when it's modeling data that is conventionally
static.

In Haskell you would structure your data using a record and ADTs, where
while you *can* express contents that might or might not exist (or wrap
a collection), the default is statically known contents.

One library to look at would be
[http://hackage.haskell.org/package/lens-aeson](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/lens-aeson)
where you have JSON documents which have possibly varying contents.

The examples demonstrate that when your path and type doesn't match the
structure/data, it kicks out a `Nothing` instead of `Just a`.

Lens doesn't *do* anything beyond provide sound getter/setter behavior.
It doesn't express a particular expectation about how your data looks,
whereas assoc-in only makes sense with associative collections with
possibly non-deterministic contents.

Another difference here is purity and laziness vs. strict and impure
semantics. In Haskell, if you never used the "older" states, and only
the most recent one, then only that value will be realized.

tl;dr lenses as found in `Lens` and other similar libraries are more
general, more useful, type-safe, and especially nice in lazy/pure FP
languages.

[share](/a/21292491 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/21292491/edit)

[edited Jan 22 at
20:31](/posts/21292491/revisions "show all edits to this post")

\

answered Jan 22 at 19:46

[](/users/1205702/bitemyapp)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/66c2fd2313df8f6f65266cf7a4f1979b?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

[bitemyapp](/users/1205702/bitemyapp)\
 46437

  -- --
     
  -- --

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

up vote 4 down vote

`assoc-in` can be more versatile than `lens` in some cases, because it
can create levels in the structure if they don't exist.

`lens` offers `Folds`, that tear down the structure and return a summary
of the contained values, and `Traversals` that modify elements in the
structure (possibly targeting several elements at once, possibly doing
nothing if the targeted element(s) are not present) while maintaining
the structure's overall "shape". But I think it would be difficult to
create intermediate levels using `lens`.

Another difference I see with the `assoc-in`-like functions in Clojure
is that these seem to be only concerned with getting and setting values,
while the very definition of a lens supports "doing something with the
value", that something possibly involving side-effects.

For example, suppose we have a tuple `(1,Right "ab")`. The second
component is a sum type that can contain a string. We want to change the
first character of the string by reading it from console. This can be
done with lenses as follows:

    (_2._Right._Cons._1) (\_ -> getChar) (1,Right "ab")
    -- reads char from console and returns the updated structure

If the string is not present, or is empty, nothing is done:

    (_2._Right._Cons._1) (\_ -> getChar) (1,Left 5)
    -- nothing read

    (_2._Right._Cons._1) (\_ -> getChar) (1,Right "")
    -- nothing read

[share](/a/21294097 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/21294097/edit)

[edited Jan 25 at
12:06](/posts/21294097/revisions "show all edits to this post")

\

answered Jan 22 at 21:12

[](/users/1364288/danidiaz)

![image](http://i.stack.imgur.com/JVtNl.png?s=32&g=1)

[danidiaz](/users/1364288/danidiaz)\
 4,4071519

  -- --
     
  -- --

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

up vote 2 down vote

This question is somewhat analogous to asking what's the difference
between Clojure's `for` and Haskell's monads. I'll mimic the answers so
far: sure `for` is sort of like a `List` monad, but monads are so much
more generic and powerful.

But, this is somewhat silly, right? Monads have been implemented in
Clojure. Why aren't they used all the time? Clojure has at its core a
different philosophy about how to handle state, but still feels free to
borrow good ideas from great languages like Haskell in its libraries.

So, sure, `assoc-in`, `get-in`, `update-in`, etc. are sort of like
lenses for associative data structures. And there are implementations of
lenses in general in Clojure out there. Why aren't they used all the
time? It is a difference in philosophy (and perhaps the eerie feeling
that with all the setters and getters we'd be making another Java inside
Clojure and somehow end up marrying our mother). But, Clojure feels free
to borrow good ideas, and you can see lens-inspired approaches making
their way into cool projects like Om and Enliven.

You have to be careful asking such questions, because like half-siblings
who occupy some of the same space Clojure and Haskell are bound to be
borrowing from each other and squabbling a bit about who is right.

[share](/a/21298291 "short permalink to this answer")|[improve this
answer](/posts/21298291/edit)

[edited Jan 23 at
21:47](/posts/21298291/revisions "show all edits to this post")

\

answered Jan 23 at 2:40

[](/users/1756702/a-webb)

![image](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/b2aeb0631b89c7948ca82c71a725e8f4?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG&f=1)

[A. Webb](/users/1756702/a-webb)\
 13.8k1439

  -- --
     
  -- --

in what way does Om use lenses? My question is in the greater context of
using React for pure DOM rendering with very complex state held in an
atom at the top of the application. – [Dustin
Getz](/users/20003/dustin-getz "8661 reputation") Jan 23 at 3:53

  -- --
     
  -- --

@DustinGetz See [Om's conceptual
overview](https://github.com/swannodette/om/wiki/Conceptual-overview). –
[A. Webb](/users/1756702/a-webb "13825 reputation") Jan 23 at 11:27

  -- --
     
  -- --

I'm not sure if I could argue that lenses and cursors are all that
similar. They solve a similar problem though. – [J.
Abrahamson](/users/476408/j-abrahamson "29824 reputation") Jan 23 at
20:12

  --- --
  1   
  --- --

Lenses and monads without types and typeclasses is madness. I'm an
experienced Clojure programmer and I'd not bother with it. –
[bitemyapp](/users/1205702/bitemyapp "464 reputation") Jan 23 at 20:21

  --- --
  1   
  --- --

Softened to lens-inspired approaches if you will. – [A.
Webb](/users/1756702/a-webb "13825 reputation") Jan 23 at 21:56

add a comment |
[](# "expand to show all comments on this post, or add one of your own")

Your Answer
-----------

draft saved

draft discarded

### Sign up or [log in](/users/login?returnurl=%2fquestions%2f21291712%2fwhen-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur%23new-answer)

Sign up using Google

Sign up using Facebook

Sign up using Stack Exchange

### Post as a guest

Name

Email required, but not shown

### Post as a guest

Name

Email required, but not shown

[discard](#)

By posting your answer, you agree to the [privacy
policy](http://stackexchange.com/legal/privacy-policy) and [terms of
service](http://stackexchange.com/legal/terms-of-service).

Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged [haskell](/questions/tagged/haskell "show questions tagged 'haskell'") [clojure](/questions/tagged/clojure "show questions tagged 'clojure'") [functional-programming](/questions/tagged/functional-programming "show questions tagged 'functional-programming'") [immutability](/questions/tagged/immutability "show questions tagged 'immutability'") [lens](/questions/tagged/lens "show questions tagged 'lens'") or [ask your own question](/questions/ask).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

asked

**8 months ago**

viewed

**875 times**

active

**[8 months ago](?lastactivity "2014-01-25 12:06:17Z")**

#### Related

[](/q/7294577 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

4

[Getting constant length retrieve time constant with immutable lists in
a functional programming
context](/questions/7294577/getting-constant-length-retrieve-time-constant-with-immutable-lists-in-a-functio)

[](/q/7365425 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

31

[Is there a Haskell idiom for updating a nested data
structure?](/questions/7365425/is-there-a-haskell-idiom-for-updating-a-nested-data-structure)

[](/q/13434568 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

10

[How do I handle the Maybe result of at in Control.Lens.Indexed without
a Monoid
instance](/questions/13434568/how-do-i-handle-the-maybe-result-of-at-in-control-lens-indexed-without-a-monoid)

[](/q/17793642 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

1

[Different setter and getter types in Haskell's
lenses](/questions/17793642/different-setter-and-getter-types-in-haskells-lenses)

[](/q/18414177 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

12

[What is the difference between \`ix\` and \`at\` in the Lens library of
Haskell](/questions/18414177/what-is-the-difference-between-ix-and-at-in-the-lens-library-of-haskell)

[](/q/19771898 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

2

[Convert Lens' a b into Lens' a (Maybe
b)](/questions/19771898/convert-lens-a-b-into-lens-a-maybe-b)

[](/q/20324625 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

2

[What is the difference between mutable values and immutable value
redefinition?](/questions/20324625/what-is-the-difference-between-mutable-values-and-immutable-value-redefinition)

[](/q/22094971 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

12

[What are the differences between lenses and
zippers?](/questions/22094971/what-are-the-differences-between-lenses-and-zippers)

[](/q/23424203 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

7

[Using a lens twice](/questions/23424203/using-a-lens-twice)

[](/q/24086221 "Vote score (upvotes - downvotes)")

1

[Compromise between functional programming and imperative
programming](/questions/24086221/compromise-between-functional-programming-and-imperative-programming)

#### [Hot Network Questions](//stackexchange.com/questions?tab=hot)

-   [What do you call a virus when it's
    cured?](http://biology.stackexchange.com/questions/21651/what-do-you-call-a-virus-when-its-cured)
-   [Algebra oriented branch of theoretical computer
    science](http://cstheory.stackexchange.com/questions/25841/algebra-oriented-branch-of-theoretical-computer-science)
-   [Is there a generalized Birkhoff ergodic
    theorem?](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/181778/is-there-a-generalized-birkhoff-ergodic-theorem)
-   [Is the plural of 'lettuce'
    'lettuces'?](http://english.stackexchange.com/questions/198243/is-the-plural-of-lettuce-lettuces)
-   [Why is gold
    golden?](http://chemistry.stackexchange.com/questions/16633/why-is-gold-golden)
-   [Comparison between
    strings](http://codereview.stackexchange.com/questions/63805/comparison-between-strings)
-   [How can I make backtracking
    interesting?](http://gamedev.stackexchange.com/questions/83893/how-can-i-make-backtracking-interesting)
-   [How strict should we be with racist comments on
    reddit?](http://moderators.stackexchange.com/questions/718/how-strict-should-we-be-with-racist-comments-on-reddit)
-   [How to validate a given domain is owned by the
    user?](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/257215/how-to-validate-a-given-domain-is-owned-by-the-user)
-   [Why not let a dwarf carry the One Ring to Mount Doom, since their
    will cannot be dominated by the rings of
    power?](http://scifi.stackexchange.com/questions/68280/why-not-let-a-dwarf-carry-the-one-ring-to-mount-doom-since-their-will-cannot-be)
-   [How do I get
    blueprints?](http://gaming.stackexchange.com/questions/185116/how-do-i-get-blueprints)
-   [Who are the villains in this
    picture?](http://scifi.stackexchange.com/questions/68374/who-are-the-villains-in-this-picture)
-   [Play the Chaos
    Game](http://codegolf.stackexchange.com/questions/38173/play-the-chaos-game)
-   [What is a specific example of how the shellshock bash bug could be
    exploited?](http://security.stackexchange.com/questions/68122/what-is-a-specific-example-of-how-the-shellshock-bash-bug-could-be-exploited)
-   [Why is Earth's climate so
    stable?](http://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/137229/why-is-earths-climate-so-stable)
-   [Little Chandler is sad. Draw him a cloud to cheer him
    up](http://codegolf.stackexchange.com/questions/38093/little-chandler-is-sad-draw-him-a-cloud-to-cheer-him-up)
-   [Which way do arrows point on a tabbed web
    page?](http://ux.stackexchange.com/questions/64728/which-way-do-arrows-point-on-a-tabbed-web-page)
-   [Is it true to say that "it's not logically possible to prove
    something can't be
    done"?](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/945048/is-it-true-to-say-that-its-not-logically-possible-to-prove-something-cant-be)
-   [Should I use a GMPC to help a small
    party?](http://rpg.stackexchange.com/questions/48441/should-i-use-a-gmpc-to-help-a-small-party)
-   [How can I tell when a process has finished writing to a
    file?](http://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/157494/how-can-i-tell-when-a-process-has-finished-writing-to-a-file)
-   [Can a new battery go bad if
    unused](http://superuser.com/questions/816546/can-a-new-battery-go-bad-if-unused)
-   [How can I generate a list of the security groups a set of users
    belong
    to?](http://serverfault.com/questions/631334/how-can-i-generate-a-list-of-the-security-groups-a-set-of-users-belong-to)
-   [Should I point out typos to colleagues in
    meetings?](http://workplace.stackexchange.com/questions/34183/should-i-point-out-typos-to-colleagues-in-meetings)
-   [Word for "sitting down
    heavily?"](http://english.stackexchange.com/questions/197935/word-for-sitting-down-heavily)

[more hot questions](#)

[question
feed](/feeds/question/21291712 "feed of this question and its answers")

![image](/posts/21291712/ivc/fb40)

default

[tour](/tour) [help](/help) [badges](/help/badges)
[blog](http://blog.stackoverflow.com?blb=1)
[chat](http://chat.stackoverflow.com)
[data](http://data.stackexchange.com)
[legal](http://stackexchange.com/legal) [privacy
policy](http://stackexchange.com/legal/privacy-policy) [work
here](http://stackexchange.com/work-here) [advertising
info](http://stackexchange.com/mediakit) mobile **[contact
us](/contact)** **[feedback](http://meta.stackoverflow.com)**

Technology

Life / Arts

Culture / Recreation

Science

Other

1.  [Stack
    Overflow](//stackoverflow.com "professional and enthusiast programmers")
2.  [Server
    Fault](//serverfault.com "professional system and network administrators")
3.  [Super User](//superuser.com "computer enthusiasts and power users")
4.  [Web
    Applications](//webapps.stackexchange.com "power users of web applications")
5.  [Ask Ubuntu](//askubuntu.com "Ubuntu users and developers")
6.  [Webmasters](//webmasters.stackexchange.com "pro webmasters")
7.  [Game
    Development](//gamedev.stackexchange.com "professional and independent game developers")
8.  [TeX -
    LaTeX](//tex.stackexchange.com "users of TeX, LaTeX, ConTeXt, and related typesetting systems")

1.  [Programmers](//programmers.stackexchange.com "professional programmers interested in conceptual questions about software development")
2.  [Unix &
    Linux](//unix.stackexchange.com "users of Linux, FreeBSD and other Un*x-like operating systems.")
3.  [Ask Different
    (Apple)](//apple.stackexchange.com "power users of Apple hardware and software")
4.  [WordPress
    Development](//wordpress.stackexchange.com "WordPress developers and administrators")
5.  [Geographic Information
    Systems](//gis.stackexchange.com "cartographers, geographers and GIS professionals")
6.  [Electrical
    Engineering](//electronics.stackexchange.com "electronics and electrical engineering professionals, students, and enthusiasts")
7.  [Android
    Enthusiasts](//android.stackexchange.com "enthusiasts and power users of the Android operating system")
8.  [Information
    Security](//security.stackexchange.com "Information security professionals")

1.  [Database
    Administrators](//dba.stackexchange.com "database professionals who wish to improve their database skills and learn from others in the community")
2.  [Drupal
    Answers](//drupal.stackexchange.com "Drupal developers and administrators")
3.  [SharePoint](//sharepoint.stackexchange.com "SharePoint enthusiasts")
4.  [User
    Experience](//ux.stackexchange.com "user experience researchers and experts")
5.  [Mathematica](//mathematica.stackexchange.com "users of Mathematica")
6.  [Salesforce](//salesforce.stackexchange.com "Salesforce administrators, implementation experts, developers and anybody in-between")
7.  [more (13)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#technology)

1.  [Photography](//photo.stackexchange.com "professional, enthusiast and amateur photographers")
2.  [Science Fiction &
    Fantasy](//scifi.stackexchange.com "science fiction and fantasy enthusiasts")
3.  [Graphic
    Design](//graphicdesign.stackexchange.com "Graphic Design professionals, students, and enthusiasts")
4.  [Seasoned Advice
    (cooking)](//cooking.stackexchange.com "professional and amateur chefs")
5.  [Home
    Improvement](//diy.stackexchange.com "contractors and serious DIYers")
6.  [Personal Finance &
    Money](//money.stackexchange.com "people who want to be financially literate")
7.  [Academia](//academia.stackexchange.com "academics and those enrolled in higher education")
8.  [more (10)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#lifearts)

1.  [English Language &
    Usage](//english.stackexchange.com "linguists, etymologists, and serious English language enthusiasts")
2.  [Skeptics](//skeptics.stackexchange.com "scientific skepticism")
3.  [Mi Yodeya
    (Judaism)](//judaism.stackexchange.com "those who base their lives on Jewish law and tradition and anyone interested in learning more")
4.  [Travel](//travel.stackexchange.com "road warriors and seasoned travelers")
5.  [Christianity](//christianity.stackexchange.com "committed Christians, experts in Christianity and those interested in learning more")
6.  [Arqade
    (gaming)](//gaming.stackexchange.com "passionate videogamers on all platforms")
7.  [Bicycles](//bicycles.stackexchange.com "people who build and repair bicycles, people who train cycling, or commute on bicycles")
8.  [Role-playing
    Games](//rpg.stackexchange.com "gamemasters and players of tabletop, paper-and-pencil role-playing games")
9.  [more (21)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#culturerecreation)

1.  [Mathematics](//math.stackexchange.com "people studying math at any level and professionals in related fields")
2.  [Cross Validated
    (stats)](//stats.stackexchange.com "people interested in statistics, machine learning, data analysis, data mining, and data visualization")
3.  [Theoretical Computer
    Science](//cstheory.stackexchange.com "theoretical computer scientists and researchers in related fields")
4.  [Physics](//physics.stackexchange.com "active researchers, academics and students of physics")
5.  [MathOverflow](//mathoverflow.net "professional mathematicians")
6.  [more (7)](http://stackexchange.com/sites#science)

1.  [Stack
    Apps](//stackapps.com "apps, scripts, and development with the Stack Exchange API")
2.  [Meta Stack
    Exchange](//meta.stackexchange.com "meta-discussion of the Stack Exchange family of Q&A websites")
3.  [Area
    51](//area51.stackexchange.com "proposing new sites in the Stack Exchange network")
4.  [Stack Overflow
    Careers](//careers.stackoverflow.com?utm_source=stackoverflow.com&utm_medium=site-ui&utm_campaign=footerlink)

site design / logo © 2014 stack exchange inc; user contributions
licensed under [cc by-sa
3.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) with [attribution
required](http://blog.stackoverflow.com/2009/06/attribution-required/)

rev 2014.9.25.1892

Stack Overflow works best with JavaScript
enabled![image](http://pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-c1rF4kxgLUzNc.gif)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/21291712/when-manipulating-immutable-datastructures-whats-the-difference-between-clojur
