[![LWN.net Logo](/images/lcorner.png)](/)

Not logged in

[Log in now](/login)

[Create an account](/newaccount)

[Subscribe to LWN](/subscribe/Info)

Weekly Edition

Return to the [Kernel page](/Articles/604218/)

Recent Features

[LWN.net Weekly Edition for July 17, 2014](/Articles/605129/)

[Genealogy research with Gramps](/Articles/605409/)

[Filesystem notification, part 2: A deeper investigation of
inotify](/Articles/605128/)

[LWN.net Weekly Edition for July 10, 2014](/Articles/604215/)

[Filesystem notification, part 1: An overview of dnotify and
inotify](/Articles/604686/)

[Printable page](/Articles/604287/?format=printable)

[Weekly edition](/current/)

[Kernel](/Kernel/)

[Security](/Security/)

[Distributions](http://lwn.net/Distributions/)

[Contact Us](/op/FAQ.lwn#contact)

[Search](/Search/)

[Archives](/Archives/)

[Calendar](/Calendar/)

[Subscribe](/subscribe/Info)

[Write for LWN](/op/AuthorGuide.lwn)

[LWN.net FAQ](/op/FAQ.lwn)

[Sponsors](/op/Sponsors.lwn)

Anatomy of a system call, part 1
================================

July 9, 2014

This article was contributed by David Drysdale

System calls are the primary mechanism by which user-space programs
interact with the Linux kernel. Given their importance, it's not
surprising to discover that the kernel includes a wide variety of
mechanisms to ensure that system calls can be implemented generically
across architectures, and can be made available to user space in an
efficient and consistent way.

I've been [working](/Articles/603929/) on [getting](/Articles/604015/)
FreeBSD's [Capsicum security
framework](http://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=capsicum&sektion=4)
onto Linux and, as this involves the addition of several new system
calls (including the slightly unusual [`execveat()` system
call](/Articles/601378/)), I found myself investigating the details of
their implementation. As a result, this is the first of a pair of
articles that explore the details of the kernel's implementation of
system calls (or syscalls). In this article we'll focus on the
mainstream case: the mechanics of a normal syscall (`read()`), together
with the machinery that allows x86\_64 user programs to invoke it. The
second article will move off the mainstream case to cover more unusual
syscalls, and other syscall invocation mechanisms.

System calls differ from regular function calls because the code being
called is in the kernel. Special instructions are needed to make the
processor perform a transition to ring 0 (privileged mode). In addition,
the kernel code being invoked is identified by a syscall number, rather
than by a function address.

#### Defining a syscall with `SYSCALL_DEFINEn()`

The `read()` system call provides a good initial example to explore the
kernel's syscall machinery. It's implemented in
[`fs/read_write.c`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/fs/read_write.c?v=3.14#L511),
as a short function that passes most of the work to `vfs_read()`. From
an invocation standpoint the most interesting aspect of this code is way
the function is defined using the `SYSCALL_DEFINE3()` macro. Indeed,
from the code, it's not even immediately clear what the function is
called.

        SYSCALL_DEFINE3(read, unsigned int, fd, char __user *, buf, size_t, count)
        {
            struct fd f = fdget_pos(fd);
            ssize_t ret = -EBADF;
            /* ... */

These `SYSCALL_DEFINEn()` macros are the standard way for kernel code to
define a system call, where the `n` suffix indicates the argument count.
The definition of these macros (in
[`include/linux/syscalls.h`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/syscalls.h?v=3.14#L175))
gives two distinct outputs for each system call.

        SYSCALL_METADATA(_read, 3, unsigned int, fd, char __user *, buf, size_t, count)
        __SYSCALL_DEFINEx(3, _read, unsigned int, fd, char __user *, buf, size_t, count)
        {
            struct fd f = fdget_pos(fd);
            ssize_t ret = -EBADF;
            /* ... */

The first of these, `SYSCALL_METADATA()`, builds a collection of
metadata about the system call for tracing purposes. It's only expanded
when
[`CONFIG_FTRACE_SYSCALLS`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/kernel/trace/Kconfig?v=3.14#L238)
is defined for the kernel build, and its expansion gives boilerplate
definitions of data that describes the syscall and its parameters. (A
[separate page](/Articles/604406/) describes these definitions in more
detail.)

The
[`__SYSCALL_DEFINEx()`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/syscalls.h?v=3.14#L187)
part is more interesting, as it holds the system call implementation.
Once the various layers of macros and [GCC type
extensions](http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Typeof.html#Typeof) are
expanded, the resulting code includes some interesting features:

        asmlinkage long sys_read(unsigned int fd, char __user * buf, size_t count)
            __attribute__((alias(__stringify(SyS_read))));

        static inline long SYSC_read(unsigned int fd, char __user * buf, size_t count);
        asmlinkage long SyS_read(long int fd, long int buf, long int count);

        asmlinkage long SyS_read(long int fd, long int buf, long int count)
        {
            long ret = SYSC_read((unsigned int) fd, (char __user *) buf, (size_t) count);
            asmlinkage_protect(3, ret, fd, buf, count);
            return ret;
        }

        static inline long SYSC_read(unsigned int fd, char __user * buf, size_t count)
        {
            struct fd f = fdget_pos(fd);
            ssize_t ret = -EBADF;
            /* ... */

First, we notice that the system call implementation actually has the
name `SYSC_read()`, but is `static` and so is inaccessible outside this
module. Instead, a wrapper function, called `SyS_read()` and
[aliased](http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Function-Attributes.html) as
`sys_read()`, is visible externally. Looking closely at those aliases,
we notice a difference in their parameter types â€” `sys_read()` expects
the explicitly declared types (e.g. `char __user *` for the second
argument), whereas `SyS_read()` just expects a bunch of (long) integers.
Digging into the
[history](http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=1a94bc34768e463a93cb3751819709ab0ea80a01)
of this, it turns out that the `long` version ensures that 32-bit values
are correctly sign-extended for some 64-bit kernel platforms, preventing
a historical
[vulnerability](http://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2009-0029).

The last things we notice with the `SyS_read()` wrapper are the
`asmlinkage` directive and `asmlinkage_protect()` call. The [Kernel
Newbies FAQ](http://kernelnewbies.org/FAQ/asmlinkage) helpfully explains
that `asmlinkage` means the function should expect its arguments on the
stack rather than in registers, and the [generic
definition](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/linkage.h?v=3.14#L51)
of `asmlinkage_protect()` explains that it's used to prevent the
compiler from assuming that it can safely reuse those areas of the
stack.

To accompany the definition of `sys_read()` (the variant with accurate
types), there's also a
[declaration](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/linux/syscalls.h?v=3.14#L545)
in `include/linux/syscalls.h`, and this allows other kernel code to call
into the system call implementation directly (which happens in [half a
dozen places](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/ident?v=3.14;i=sys_read)).
Calling system calls directly from elsewhere in the kernel is generally
discouraged and is not often seen.

#### Syscall table entries

Hunting for callers of
[`sys_read()`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/ident?v=3.14;i=sys_read)
also points the way toward how user space reaches this function. For
"generic" architectures that don't provide an override of their own, the
`include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h` file includes an
[entry](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h?v=3.14#L199)
referencing `sys_read`:

        #define __NR_read 63
        __SYSCALL(__NR_read, sys_read)

This defines the generic syscall number `__NR_read` (63) for `read()`,
and uses the `__SYSCALL()` macro to associate that number with
`sys_read()`, in an architecture-specific way. For example, arm64 uses
the `asm-generic/unistd.h` header file to [fill out a
table](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/arm64/kernel/sys.c?v=3.14#L53)
that maps syscall numbers to implementation function pointers.

However, we're going to concentrate on the x86\_64 architecture, which
does not use this generic table. Instead, x86\_64 defines its own
mappings in `arch/x86/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl`, which has an
[entry](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl?v=3.14#L9)
for `sys_read()`:

        0   common  read            sys_read

This indicates that `read()` on x86\_64 has syscall number 0 (not 63),
and has a `common` implementation for both of the ABIs for x86\_64,
namely `sys_read()`. (The different ABIs will be discussed in the second
part of this series.) The
[`syscalltbl.sh`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/syscalls/syscalltbl.sh?v=3.14)
script generates `arch/x86/include/generated/asm/syscalls_64.h` from the
`syscall_64.tbl` table, specifically generating an invocation of the
`__SYSCALL_COMMON()` macro for `sys_read()`. This header file is used,
in turn, to populate the syscall table, `sys_call_table`, which is the
key data structure that maps syscall numbers to `sys_name()` functions.

#### x86\_64 syscall invocation

Now we will look at how user-space programs invoke the system call. This
is inherently architecture-specific, so for the rest of this article
we'll concentrate on the x86\_64 architecture (other x86 architectures
will be examined in the second article of the series). The invocation
process also involves a few steps, so a clickable diagram, seen at left,
may help with the navigation.

![[System call diagram]](/images/2014/syscall_x86_64.png)

In the previous section, we discovered a table of system call function
pointers; [the table for
x86\_64](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/kernel/syscall_64.c?v=3.14#L25)
looks something like the following (using a [GCC extension for array
initialization](http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Designated-Inits.html)
that ensures any missing entries point to `sys_ni_syscall()`):

        asmlinkage const sys_call_ptr_t sys_call_table[__NR_syscall_max+1] = {
            [0 ... __NR_syscall_max] = &sys_ni_syscall,
            [0] = sys_read,
            [1] = sys_write,
            /*... */
        };

For 64-bit code, this table is accessed from
[`arch/x86/kernel/entry_64.S`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/kernel/entry_64.S?v=3.14#L629),
from the
[`system_call`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/kernel/entry_64.S?v=3.14#L593)
assembly entry point; it uses the RAX register to pick the relevant
entry in the array and then calls it. Earlier in the function, the
[`SAVE_ARGS`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/include/asm/calling.h?v=3.14#L88)
macro pushes various registers onto the stack, to match the `asmlinkage`
directive we saw earlier.

Moving outwards, the `system_call` entry point is itself
[referenced](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/kernel/cpu/common.c?v=3.14#L1134)
in `syscall_init()`, a function that is
[called](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/kernel/cpu/common.c?v=3.14#L1277)
early in the kernel's startup sequence:

        void syscall_init(void)
        {
            /*
             * LSTAR and STAR live in a bit strange symbiosis.
             * They both write to the same internal register. STAR allows to
             * set CS/DS but only a 32bit target. LSTAR sets the 64bit rip.
             */
            wrmsrl(MSR_STAR,  ((u64)__USER32_CS)<<48  | ((u64)__KERNEL_CS)<<32);
            wrmsrl(MSR_LSTAR, system_call);
            wrmsrl(MSR_CSTAR, ignore_sysret);
            /* ... */

The `wrmsrl` instruction writes a value to a [model-specific
register](http://wiki.osdev.org/Model_Specific_Registers); in this case,
the address of the general `system_call` syscall handling function is
written to register
[`MSR_LSTAR`](http://lxr.free-electrons.com/source/arch/x86/include/uapi/asm/msr-index.h?v=3.14#L9)
(0xc0000082), which is the x86\_64 model-specific register for handling
the `SYSCALL` instruction.

And this gives us all we need to join the dots from user space to the
kernel code. The standard ABI for how x86\_64 user programs invoke a
system call is to put the system call number (0 for `read`) into the RAX
register, and the other parameters into specific registers (RDI, RSI,
RDX for the first 3 parameters), then issue the `SYSCALL` instruction.
This instruction causes the processor to transition to ring 0 and invoke
the code referenced by the `MSR_LSTAR` model-specific register â€” namely
`system_call`. The `system_call` code pushes the registers onto the
kernel stack, and calls the function pointer at entry RAX in the
`sys_call_table` table â€” namely `sys_read()`, which is a thin,
`asmlinkage` wrapper for the real implementation in `SYSC_read()`.

Now that we've seen the standard implementation of system calls on the
most common platform, we're in a better position to understand what's
going on with other architectures, and with less-common cases. That will
be the subject of the second article in the series.

* * * * *

([Log in](https://lwn.net/login?target=/Articles/604287/) to post
comments)

Bravo

Posted Jul 10, 2014 12:56 UTC (Thu) by **smitty\_one\_each**
(subscriber, \#28989) [[Link](/Articles/604971/)]

Bravo, thank you, and may Fortune smile on your day, Drysdale.\
 This is precisely the sort of well-written intermediate material that
is needed to help\
 (a) the n00bs like me, and\
 (b) the ninjas who haven't reviewed it lately.\
 More of this!\
 Cheers,\
 Chris\

Calling syscalls from the kernel

Posted Jul 10, 2014 22:21 UTC (Thu) by **bourbaki** (subscriber,
\#84259) [[Link](/Articles/605053/)]

Hello David,\

Thanks for this article, it looks like the start of a very promising
series. I have question though, that you or other kernel hackers may
answer :\

\> Calling system calls directly from elsewhere in the kernel is
generally discouraged and is not often seen.\

I have searched about this a bit but couldn't find a specific reason for
why it's "generally discouraged". Could someone enlighten me ?\

Thanks\

Calling syscalls from the kernel

Posted Jul 11, 2014 11:33 UTC (Fri) by **roblucid** (subscriber,
\#48964) [[Link](/Articles/605109/)]

One general principal reason would be, that lower layer software,
breaking out and calling higher layer software, turns a "calling tree"
into a "network graph", much harder to analyse and reason about it's
performance.\

More simply, a system call is designed for user space interaction, in
general something in kernel, ought to be using an in-kernel service,
rather than re-purposing a user space interface.\

[ As noone answered this question yet ]\

Calling syscalls from the kernel

Posted Jul 14, 2014 9:33 UTC (Mon) by **drysdale** (subscriber, \#95971)
[[Link](/Articles/605331/)]

That's roughly my understanding too. System calls typically check all
their (user-provided) arguments carefully, and also copy any needed
chunks of memory from \_\_user \* pointers -- all of which is
inefficient for internal usage. So it's more common to have an inner
function that the rest of the kernel calls, and the syscall wraps.\

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 11, 2014 9:01 UTC (Fri) by **geuder** (subscriber, \#62854)
[[Link](/Articles/605088/)]

Thank you for the very detailed description. Occasionnally I had to
track down (parts of) this from the source for debugging some issue and
it can be very tedious.\

A little detail, but a nuisance for humans, especially if you debug an
emebedded target and compare to your desktop known to work correctly:
What is the technical reason to have partially architecture specific
syscall number? Passing a number in a register does not look like
anything inherently architecture specific.\

If you quickly need to see the syscall numbers for a given architecture
I have seen the hint to look at strace source. I'm just at my phone now,
so I don't compare the source now, but I vaguely remember it was indeed
easier to navigate than the kernel source proper. Was it so that strace
distributes ready lists while for the kernel they need to be built for
each architecture? \

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 11, 2014 9:53 UTC (Fri) by **sasha** (subscriber, \#16070)
[[Link](/Articles/605099/)]

\> What is the technical reason to have partially architecture specific
syscall number?\

For "compatibility" with other, older OSes used on the architecture. No,
I do not understand what kind of "compatibility" you can get in such a
way, but it is the main reason.\

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 11, 2014 16:55 UTC (Fri) by **alonz** (subscriber, \#815)
[[Link](/Articles/605185/)]

I believe by now the reason is mainly historical.

Originally (in the days of Linux 1.x / 2.0) Linux attempted to be binary
compatible to existing Unices on common hardware (the `personality(2)`
system call is also part of this). As time passed, compatibility with
other Unices became mostly a non-issue â€“ but now we do need to maintain
binary compatibility with older Linux binariesâ€¦

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 11, 2014 22:12 UTC (Fri) by **geuder** (subscriber, \#62854)
[[Link](/Articles/605201/)]

\> Originally (in the days of Linux 1.x / 2.0) Linux attempted to be
binary compatible to existing Unices on common hardware\

That sounds like a reasonable explanation. Besides that back in those
days what Unices were running on x86\_64 and ARM? And these 2 differ.
Yeah well, maybe the dependencies are not direct, but somehow indirect
over other platforms?\

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 11, 2014 22:22 UTC (Fri) by **sfeam** (subscriber, \#2841)
[[Link](/Articles/605204/)]

As I recall, linux binaries for alpha would run under Digital Unix on
alpha.

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 13, 2014 0:00 UTC (Sun) by **gb** (subscriber, \#58328)
[[Link](/Articles/605262/)]

Why such a strange implementation taken - put values into registers,
switch to ring 0, than put this values into stack? Isn't it make more
sense to keep values in the registers till real syscall function which
may, if it wants, push values to the stack?\

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 14, 2014 9:45 UTC (Mon) by **drysdale** (subscriber, \#95971)
[[Link](/Articles/605332/)]

Having the arguments in registers for the ring transition means that
there's no need for fancy footwork to get at the userspace stack memory
(compare the innards of `copy_from_user()`).

Storing the registers on the kernel stack allows the state of the
registers to be restored on the return to userspace. But once the
parameters are available on the stack, there's no need to preserve them
in the registers too â€“ the syscall can get its arguments from the stack
(i.e. be `asmlinkage`) and can immediately use (and clobber) the
registers.

Anatomy of a system call, part 1

Posted Jul 16, 2014 17:03 UTC (Wed) by **nix** (subscriber, \#2304)
[[Link](/Articles/605636/)]

Quite. Keeping the args on the stack is a non-starter: userspace stacks
are swappable, and you \*don't\* want to have to go checking to see if
the args have been swapped out in the instant of ring transition: it's
the sort of terribly narrow race that leads to code that rots and then
silently breaks in almost-impossible-to-debug ways, and for almost no
gain.\

But obviously the args have to end up on the stack -- or, rather, have
to end up whereever the C ABI for the platform says they should
(possibly optimized by asmlinkage, but still, something the compiler
supports).\

Thanks for this article: I too have wasted entirely too much time
tracking this down in pieces now and then: it's nice to have a reference
here for next time. Looking forward to the next one.\

Copyright Â© 2014, Eklektix, Inc.\
 Comments and public postings are copyrighted by their creators.\
 Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds\


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://lwn.net/Articles/604287/
