[![aGupieWare](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-WokOYF6BZmU/UfQIgFy_RXI/AAAAAAAAAA8/H4ynIQSBT18/s1600/aGupieWare-masthead01.png)](http://blog.agupieware.com/)

Pages
-----

-   [Home](http://blog.agupieware.com/)
-   [About](http://blog.agupieware.com/p/about.html)
-   [Apps](http://blog.agupieware.com/p/agupieware-apps.html)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=1458274389096873945&widgetType=PageList&widgetId=PageList1&action=editWidget&sectionId=crosscol "Edit")

### Online Learning: A Bachelor's Level Computer Science Program Curriculum (Updated)

**Introduction**\
 A few months back we took an in-depth look at MIT’s [free online
Introduction to Computer Science
course](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013/12/online-learning-teach-yourself-python.html),
and laid out a self-study time table to complete the class within four
months, along with a companion post providing [learning
benchmarks](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/01/benchmarks-teach-yourself-python-in.html)
to chart your progress. In the present article, I'll step back and take
a much more broad look at com-sci course offerings available for free on
the internet, in order to answer a deceptively straightforward question:
is it possible to complete the equivalent of a college bachelor’s degree
in computer science through college and university courses that are
freely available online? And if so, how does one do so?\
 \

[![image](http://www.zzilo.com/media/catalog/category/computer_science_1.jpg)](http://www.zzilo.com/media/catalog/category/computer_science_1.jpg)

The former question is more difficult to answer than it may at first
appear. There are, of course, tons of resources relating to computer
science and engineering, computer programming, software engineering,
etc. that can easily be found online with a few simple searches.
However, despite this fact, it is very unlikely that you would find a
free, basic computer science curriculum offered in one complete package
from any given academic source. The reason for this is fairly obvious.
Why pay $50,000 a year to go to Harvard, for example, if you could take
all the exact same courses online for free? \
 \
 Yet, this does not mean that all the necessary elements for such a
curriculum are not freely accessible. Indeed, today there are
undoubtedly more such resources available at the click of a button than
any person could get through even in an entire lifetime of study. The
problem is that organizing a series of random lecture courses you find
on the internet into a coherent curriculum is actually rather difficult,
especially when those courses are offered by different institutions for
different reasons and for considerably different programs of study, and
so on. Indeed, colleges themselves require massive advisory
bureaucracies to help students navigate their way through complicated
degree requirements, even though those programs already form a coherent
curriculum and course of study. But, still, it’s not impossible to do it
yourself, with a little bit of help perhaps.\
 \
 The present article will therefore attempt to sketch out a generic
bachelor’s level curriculum in computer science on the basis of program
requirements distilled from a number of different computer science
departments at top universities from around the country. I will then
provide links to a set of specific college and university courses that
are freely available online which, if taken together, would satisfy the
requirements of our generic computer science curriculum.\
 \
 **A Hypothetical Curriculum**\
 So, what are the requirements of our hypothetical computer science
program? Despite overarching similarities, there are actually many
differences between courses of study offered at different colleges and
universities, especially in computer science. Some programs are more
geared toward electrical engineering and robotics, others toward
software development and programming, or toward computer architecture
and hardware design, or mathematics and cryptography, or networking and
applications, and on and on. Our curriculum will attempt to integrate
courses that would be common to all such programs, while also providing
a selection of electives that could function as an introduction to those
various concentrations. \
 \
 There are essentially four major parts to any bachelor’s level course
of study, in any given field: pre-requisites, core requirements,
concentration requirements and electives. \
 \
 Pre-requisites are what you need to know before you even begin. For
many courses of study, there are no pre-requisites, and no specialized
prior knowledge is required or presumed on the part of the student,
since the introductory core requirements themselves provide students
with the requisite knowledge and skills. \
 \
 Core requirements are courses that anyone in a given field is required
to take, no matter what their specialization or specific areas of
interest within the field may be. These sorts of classes provide a
general base-level knowledge of the field that can then be built upon in
the study of more advanced and specialized topics. \
 \
 Concentration requirements are classes that are required as part of a
given concentration, focus or specialization within an overall
curriculum. For example, all students who major in computer science at a
given university may be required to take two general introductory
courses in the field, but students who decide to concentrate on
cryptography may be required to take more math classes, while students
interested in electrical engineering may take required courses on
robotics, while others interested in software development may be
required to study programming methodologies and so on.\
 \
 Finally, electives are courses within the overall curriculum that
individuals may decide to take at will, in accordance with their own
particular interests. Some people may prefer to take electives which
reenforce sub-fields related to their concentration, while others may
elect to sign on for courses that may only be tangentially related to
their concentration.\
 \
 Our hypothetical curriculum will simplify this model. We will assume no
prerequisites are necessary other than an interest in learning the
material and a basic high school education. Our curriculum will also not
offer any concentration tracks in the traditional sense, as that would
require specialized resources that are not within the scope of our
current domain. Instead, our planned curriculum shall provide for
introductory courses, general core requirements, and a choice of
electives that may also serve as a basis for further concentration
studies.\
 \
 **Basic Requirements**\
 A quick survey of curricular requirements for programs in computer
science at a number of the country’s top colleges and universities
reveals a wide spectrum of possibilities for our proposed curriculum,
from a ten course minor in computer science to a twenty-five course
intensive major in the field along with an interdisciplinary
concentration. (See, for example,
[MIT](http://www.eecs.mit.edu/academics-admissions/undergraduate-programs/curriculum),
[Carnegie Mellon](http://www.csd.cs.cmu.edu/),
[Berkeley](http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/education/degrees.shtml),
[Stanford](http://cs.stanford.edu/degrees/undergrad/) and
[Columbia](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/education/undergrad), or the
comp-sci page for a college or university near you.) \
 \
 Our proposed curriculum will attempt to stake out a space between those
two poles, and aim for a program that consists of about 15 courses: 3
introductory classes, 7 core classes and 5 electives. The required
topics and themes of a generic computer science degree program are
fairly easy to distill from the comparison: introduction to the field,
data structures, algorithms, programming languages, operating systems,
networking, data communications, systems engineering, software
development, and so on. Our program will consist of university or
college level courses from around the world that cover our basic
requirements and are freely available in full online.\
 \
 Note: I have, unfortunately, not watched every single video from all of
the courses below. However, I have completed three of them in full,
viewed a handful lectures from a number of the other courses, and spot
checked the videos from the rest for quality. \
 \
 \
 **Introductory Courses**\
 \
 Intro to Computer Science, pick two of three: \

[Introduction to Computer Science and
Programming](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-00sc-introduction-to-computer-science-and-programming-spring-2011/):
MIT

[Intensive Introduction to Computer
Science](http://www.extension.harvard.edu/open-learning-initiative/intensive-introduction-computer-science):
Harvard

[Introduction to Computer Science and Programming
Methodology](http://see.stanford.edu/see/courseInfo.aspx?coll=824a47e1-135f-4508-a5aa-866adcae1111):
Stanford

-   [Programming
    Abstractions](http://www.youtube.com/view_play_list?p=FE6E58F856038C69)
    (Second Course in Unit): Stanford

Basic mathematics, pick one of two: \

-   [Mathematics for Computer
    Science](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-042j-mathematics-for-computer-science-fall-2010/):
    MIT
-   [Discrete
    Mathematics](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h_9WjWENWV8&feature=share&list=PLTdIp1DywMlUpLHEg3ADhE6rrxhW_T5Rx):
    ArsDigita

\
 **Core Courses**\
 \
 Data Structures and Algorithms, pick one of two:\

-   [Introduction to Data Structures and
    Algorithms](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RpRRUQFbePU&list=PLE621E25B3BF8B9D1):
    UNSW
-   [Introduction to
    Algorithms](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-006-introduction-to-algorithms-fall-2011/):
    MIT

Operating Systems:\

-   [Operating Systems and Systems
    Programming](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XgQo4JkN4Bw&list=PL62A66DDD3B3CC0B7):
    Berkeley

Programming Languages and Methodologies:\

-   [Programming
    Paradigms](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL9D558D49CA734A02):
    Stanford

Computer Architecture:\

-   [Computer
    Architecture](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL5PHm2jkkXmgDN1PLwOY_tGtUlynnyV6D):
    Carnegie Mellon

Networking:\

-   [Fundamentals of Computer
    Networking](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCb1OiccPJ0wbMZMOleCvhWQ):
    Manhattan College

Data Communications:\

-   [Introduction to Data
    Communications](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLvifRcqOOwF8u4iC7hFTMVC_WD6SEpnkx):
    Thammasat University

Cryptography and Security:\

-   [Introduction to
    Cryptography](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC1usFRN4LCMcfIV7UjHNuQg):
    Ruhr University

\
 **Electives**\
 \
 Web Development:\

-   [Building Dynamic Websites](http://cs75.tv/2012/summer/): Harvard

Data Structures:\

-   [Advanced Data
    Structures](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-851-advanced-data-structures-spring-2012/):
    MIT

Systems:\

-   [Computer System
    Engineering](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-033-computer-system-engineering-spring-2009/):
    MIT

Programming Languages:\

-   [Principles of Programming
    Languages](http://freevideolectures.com/Course/2249/Principles-of-Programming-Languages/1):
    IIT

Security:\

-   [Introduction to IT
    Security](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bx5CPmNbblI&list=PLvifRcqOOwF89bqRiJEWyu5k7qJaTNMRj):
    Thammasat University
-   [Security and
    Cryptography](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLvifRcqOOwF-b74gWV5TpyMFFs2dVlqTt):
    Thammasat University

Cryptography:\

-   [Bilinear Pairings in
    Cryptography](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLXF_IJaFk-9C4p3b2tK7H9a9axOm3EtjA&feature=mh_lolz):
    BIU

App Development:\

-   [iPhone Application
    Development](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1D5B07DD840FB46D):
    ITU
-   [Android Application
    Development](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1E8E7D2B6EB11301):
    ITU

Artificial Intelligence:\

-   [Artificial
    Intelligence](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=katiy95_mxo&list=PL39B5D3AFC249556A):
    HRW
-   [Artificial
    Intelligence](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZ23-HrWyUE&index=10&list=PLF1A9D9034225FC92):
    Berkeley

Graphics:\

-   [Computer
    Graphics](http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/%7Ecs184/fa12/onlinelectures.html):
    Berkeley

Math:\

-   [Statistics and
    Probability](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2SOU6wwxB0uwwH80KTQ6ht66KWxbzTIo):
    Harvard
-   [Probabilistic Systems Analysis and Applied
    Probability](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-041-probabilistic-systems-analysis-and-applied-probability-fall-2010/index.htm):
    MIT

Leave any suggestions for improvements or additions in the comments!\
 \
 **UPDATE:** There has been a ton of great feedback on this post, with
suggestions for additions, critiques of the overall form, identification
of "glaring holes" and more. Thanks everyone! However, rather than
address them one by one in the comments, or include them all into an
update of some sort, I think I may just begin work on a new version of
the piece which provides a more intensive track of study and tries to
incorporate as many of those suggestions as possible, assuming that
examples of such courses are available for free in full online from a
college or university. So be sure to check back in future!\

Posted by
[AdminX](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10568338228642310811 "author profile")
on
[5/07/2014](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html "permanent link")
[![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/icon18_edit_allbkg.gif)](http://www.blogger.com/post-edit.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=7729241761257657607&from=pencil "Edit Post")

Labels: [computer
science](http://blog.agupieware.com/search/label/computer%20science),
[online
learning](http://blog.agupieware.com/search/label/online%20learning)

#### 57 comments:

1.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-l6UR0RctAK4/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAFI/hk9N8U3pRtg/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [David
    Karapetyan](http://www.blogger.com/profile/11608989663308434850)[May
    7, 2014 at 6:19
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399511968616#c1890537068954788815)

    Really nice list. I'm impressed. I didn't know youtube was hiding
    such treasures.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=1890537068954788815)

2.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [pablo](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04407460512074328718)[May 7,
    2014 at 6:20
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399512028642#c4554496850904464274)

    Coursera's compilers course could be added here.
    https://www.coursera.org/course/compilers

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4554496850904464274)

3.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Unknown](http://www.blogger.com/profile/01615186887576009088)[May
    7, 2014 at 6:46
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399513595421#c2798447430141595801)

    I could be missing it but there seems to be at least one glaring
    hole. Where is the class that teaches you about real software
    engineering? I am talking about writing up a formal design spec and
    having a real plan rather than haphazardly getting it to work, which
    \*should\* never allowed in the real world. Possibly, it could cover
    the gang of four "Design Patterns" or some more recent derivative?

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=2798447430141595801)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Chris
        Carpenter](http://www.blogger.com/profile/02706884308545152128)[May
        8, 2014 at 7:39
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399559956650#c5046746791946816416)

        Correct me if i'm wrong, but I was under the impression that
        most university computer science program's don't include "real
        software engineering" much anyways. That is an elective for
        Computer Science and the purpose of the Software Engineering
        degree I thought.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5046746791946816416)

    2.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Brett
        Bazant](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15157955997416079927)[May
        8, 2014 at 8:40
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399563643096#c5301181695179828155)

        plus such topics are always in flux -- it was structured design,
        then object-oriented design, then agile, then etc. etc.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5301181695179828155)

4.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Felix](http://www.blogger.com/profile/08802264530896795198)[May 7,
    2014 at 7:51
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399517490816#c8446139016380488815)

    At Unknown's comment: 6.005 at MIT could work for an introduction to
    software engineering:\
    \
    http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-005-elements-of-software-construction-fall-2011/index.htm\
    \
    Of course, a large portion of the class is learning from mandatory
    code-reviews and working in small teams, which is hard to pull off
    online...

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8446139016380488815)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Unknown](http://www.blogger.com/profile/01615186887576009088)[May
        7, 2014 at 8:20
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399519217401#c4891648671920740650)

        That course may be a good addition. And I very much agree that a
        course like this requiring small teams would be difficult to do
        online. Getting people to work together for in person classes is
        hard as it is.\
        \
        -Travis

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4891648671920740650)

    2.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-PAn3wHE4yYc/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAOI/UPmY24bBnfk/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Antonio
        Stevens](http://www.blogger.com/profile/02818184643825449340)[May
        8, 2014 at 11:52
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399575122242#c8718557878866293304)

        This comment has been removed by the author.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8718557878866293304)

5.  ![image](//lh4.googleusercontent.com/-ZoXu8Nqrjew/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAFc/xjyl2_VBTG8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Ashish
    Sharma](http://www.blogger.com/profile/07989439942828580185)[May 7,
    2014 at 11:50
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399531831105#c1178669074111505935)

    Do you think you would like to include
    www.codelearn.org/android-tutorial alongside ITU Android Development
    Course .\
    \
    Disclaimer: I am the Founder :).

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=1178669074111505935)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Dave](http://www.blogger.com/profile/13001860094017939009)[May
        8, 2014 at 1:16
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399580169690#c2144982756614661069)

        This was meant to be a list of free resources - your site
        requires payment.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=2144982756614661069)

    2.  ![image](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_uUp03TqRUPQ/SaxrZtpjpUI/AAAAAAAAAAs/qBWHUMhsizA/S45/robrupp.jpg)

        [Robert](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10248044438530642953)[May
        11, 2014 at 2:16
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399799784313#c4599927742159930127)

        And no offense, you are a scammer indian. If I get one more
        stupid unwanted email from an indian dev for web work, seo, or
        likewise i will scream. You guys are completely shady, you offer
        shit service, and half of you dont know shit. Go try Attracta
        once, I dare you, or some other large indian operated outfit.
        Get fucked Ashish.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4599927742159930127)

    3.  ![image](//lh4.googleusercontent.com/-OdZgQL_qZKg/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAATA/JNDRmgctBXc/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Matthieu
        Disna](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15702877646190655073)[May
        12, 2014 at 4:31
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399894294049#c1989846691989351344)

        Wow, that was prejudice and racist...

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=1989846691989351344)

    4.  ![image](//lh6.googleusercontent.com/-1h93NoxFaTE/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAB0/Ghpe-7DPVGU/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Vishwakarma
        Sevak](http://www.blogger.com/profile/16090865353240966583)[May
        13, 2014 at 2:38
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399973908977#c6845311201283651232)

        Hey guys at aGupieware. Does Robert work for/with you? If not,
        are you going to at least chastise him PUBLICLY for (1) his
        racist remarks (2) the abuse he has hurled at another person in
        an open forum?\
        \
        Because if you are not going to do that then expect a call from
        my lawyers before Friday, May 16, 2014. And trust me, I will
        shutdown your site, your company and your life. That's not a
        threat, that's a warning.\

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=6845311201283651232)

    5.  ![image](//lh6.googleusercontent.com/-tdXCXuew4LI/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAH0/K_bujLh6knQ/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Dan
        Petrisko](http://www.blogger.com/profile/11096212228991161943)[May
        13, 2014 at 8:38
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400038708223#c3685648569517071241)

        First, why would you assume Robert has any more of an
        affiliation with this blog than you or I? Second, a request to
        remove the offensive comment is much more reasonable than an
        empty, childish threat to "shutdown his life". Third, it is not
        the responsibility of an author to berate anyone for having a
        racist opinion. Fourth, bloggers are protected from these kind
        of legal threats by section 230.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=3685648569517071241)

    6.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [AdminX](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10568338228642310811)[May
        14, 2014 at 10:25
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400088311101#c2771329246482867966)

        Just as a note, since it's been brought up, the commenter Robert
        above has no affiliation with this site whatsoever. And Matthieu
        has called him out on his racism already. But rather than delete
        an comment, I prefer to leave it as a reminder that racist
        stupidity can be found pretty much everywhere.\
        \
        On the other hand, tough guy empty threats like those from
        Vishwakarma, are equally stupid.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=2771329246482867966)

6.  ![image](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_RgH_2Albvz0/SiwT2Wl3-qI/AAAAAAAAAQ0/oEHa3F08w9o/S45/Selfee.jpeg)

    [VíctorMireles](http://www.blogger.com/profile/09165400788001783218)[May
    8, 2014 at 3:30
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399545031436#c4148265310782203942)

    This curriculum seems like a very good starting point for any one
    wanting to get acquainted with computer science (CS). However, it
    is, in my opinion, far from a bachelor's level. I think suggesting
    otherwise might mislead people into thinking this is all someone
    holding a bachelor's in CS will learn at school\
    To exemplify this: 15 (or even 20) classes can be covered in 3 or 4
    semesters, while a typical bachelor's degree is, at the very least
    6, semesters. This is not arbitrary. \
    Very important mathematical concepts and tools are not covered in
    the "Math for CS"-type of courses. That is why Calculus (both scalar
    and vectorial), Analytic Geometry, Linear Algebra, (so-called
    Modern) Algebra, Differential Equations, Probability, courses are
    also usually included as mandatory. Apart from the mathematical
    skills that mastering this subjects bring, since there is so much
    interaction between CS and other sciences, it is important to equip
    students with a common language to communicate with other fields and
    understand their problems.\
    From the strictly CS point of view, I would mention three major
    deficiencies: \
    I. In the theoretical part, there is no course on Theory of
    Computation (can you imagine a CS student that doesn't understand
    the proof of the existence of non-computable problems?)\
    II. From the more practical point of view: more basic programming
    oriented courses are necessary, especially if no pre-requirements on
    programming are present, for example, a course solely on Object
    Oriented Programming, or an ACM- or IOI- type of programming course
    (e.g. projecteuler). Also, there are many students that are not
    familiar with things that are basic in the academic or industry
    work: using Linux, using an IDE, and, even, using a spreadsheet.
    This last point is specially true in developing countries, which is
    big part of the audicience of an online-learning effort.\
    III. From the more career-oriented point of view currently widely
    used technologies/methods like Relational Databases, Web Services,
    Distributed Computing, and, yes, also something on Software
    Engineering. \
    Also, some advanced research-seminar type of course is usually
    desirable, to have students interact with current literature and
    technological developments

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4148265310782203942)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-dsZplqVqHgI/T7pi6lBYILI/AAAAAAAAAJg/RcQ_VTTc2Lk/s45/548087_352316671499626_100001638888259_1033480_1069986785_n.jpg)

        [Rodrigo
        Araújo](http://www.blogger.com/profile/16643448770772162812)[May
        8, 2014 at 1:40
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399581606482#c5787979637479860365)

        This.\
        \
        Totally agree.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5787979637479860365)

    2.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [AdminX](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10568338228642310811)[May
        8, 2014 at 3:55
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399589734351#c8167803724751940480)

        Hello Victor, thanks for this detailed and substantive reply.
        Your points are well taken, and I even reflected on a couple of
        them while putting the piece together. There was one main hurdle
        I encountered in this regard: finding examples of such courses
        (for example, a course on the Theory of Computation) that are
        available for free in full online, and which are also of high
        enough audio/video quality to be tolerable over the long haul,
        and which were also from a major college or university. I also
        didn't want to put in so much stuff that it would seem
        immediately overwhelming. But since I've gotten so much great
        feedback and so many suggestions for this article, I'll probably
        do some research and put a companion piece together that would
        be like a more intensive study track, or something along those
        lines.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8167803724751940480)

    3.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Paul](http://www.blogger.com/profile/05465051578652078129)[May
        9, 2014 at 5:48
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399639716211#c8752941387531833927)

        Got interested in computers playing at mama's knee back in the
        1970's with the discarded punch cards. In the 80's, I was
        learning electronics and selling/repairing computers. By the
        90's, I was repairing computers and starting to teach classes in
        them. I did not have more than 1-2 brick-and-mortar classes in
        the IT field until about 4 years ago. In other words, most of my
        knowledge came by experience along with trial and error. I have
        unofficially taken many of the courses listed above and have
        gained valuable knowledge from it. Would I consider them a
        college equivalent? It depends. Most colleges do not have the
        luxury of staff fresh from the trenches. In fact, if the person
        has taught at all, it has been for years and years. They are
        tired and worn out, along with their methods and messages. So
        these courses listed above are taught by leaders of the computer
        world who have studied and gained practical experience. Thus,
        there are points in that direction over traditional college. Are
        there shortfalls/ shortcomings? Sure and Victor above there
        mentioned more than a few of them. If there was a way to remove
        those shortcomings, would this, then, be equivalent to college?

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8752941387531833927)

7.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [haopu](http://www.blogger.com/profile/08619212089830808764)[May 8,
    2014 at 3:45
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399545916533#c3079081906670742418)

    This is really impressive.\
    Excellent work!

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=3079081906670742418)

8.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-GK_b55dKbxA/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAIOU/XeVnaGumwzg/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Luan
    Cestari](http://www.blogger.com/profile/13782804498370329172)[May 8,
    2014 at 4:31
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399548705601#c8713081519071496893)

    Very nice =) I would just suggest to take a look on ACM suggested
    curriculum to pickup more ideas -\>
    http://www.acm.org/education/CS2013-final-report.pdf

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8713081519071496893)

9.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [acmleal](http://www.blogger.com/profile/09100799756779095831)[May
    8, 2014 at 5:36
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399552603487#c6687453684238695826)

    This is a great compilation! And, I believe, a amazing kickstart of
    something bigger.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=6687453684238695826)

10. ![image](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-0Sml1FgfiO0/ULJLGKDnNPI/AAAAAAAAAC8/K-NXqrhL4ls/s45/002.JPG)

    [hamza](http://www.blogger.com/profile/09747728615903102014)[May 8,
    2014 at 11:29
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399573743685#c5382166344514387917)

    an impressive list..

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5382166344514387917)

11. ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-PAn3wHE4yYc/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAOI/UPmY24bBnfk/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Antonio
    Stevens](http://www.blogger.com/profile/02818184643825449340)[May 8,
    2014 at 11:54
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399575295831#c1046194122803929017)

    I am excited about this list. However, if you cant list it on your
    resume, it almost kills the point. :(

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=1046194122803929017)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Brandon
        Scriver](http://www.blogger.com/profile/09524458344243650650)[May
        8, 2014 at 12:13
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399576387654#c6543239586214112189)

        Ummm yeah, aside from being able to complete actual projects
        that you could put on a resume.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=6543239586214112189)

    2.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Steven
        Grimm](http://www.blogger.com/profile/05606708813334866988)[May
        8, 2014 at 1:04
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399579469823#c4629438437306404678)

        Mastering all this material would enable you to go to an
        accredited school and, assuming you found willing professors,
        test out of some or all of the corresponding courses at that
        school. (I tested out of a couple of my university courses, so I
        know with 100% certainty that it's possible.) Absent that, you
        could enroll in more classes per semester than a student who had
        to spend time absorbing the new material. You'd thus be able to
        complete a degree program more quickly and at less expense.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4629438437306404678)

    3.  ![image](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-SHiyezmmg54/Usr0MP6hThI/AAAAAAAAD0U/ILchDdSJ52I/s45/ironman_mask_small.jpg)

        [jlk](http://www.blogger.com/profile/17039719920081966779)[May
        8, 2014 at 7:24
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399602288548#c541541571334513499)

        No need to get hung up on putting your education on your resume.
        I am someone who never got my degree, but count on my experience
        and knowledge. Going through the courses here, and others
        online, can only expand and better your knowledge. This is an
        awesome list and a great start. I, for one, cannot wait to see
        what the 'intensive list' looks like.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=541541571334513499)

    4.  ![image](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_uUp03TqRUPQ/SaxrZtpjpUI/AAAAAAAAAAs/qBWHUMhsizA/S45/robrupp.jpg)

        [Robert](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10248044438530642953)[May
        11, 2014 at 2:19
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399799960744#c666074682690471346)

        Agreed. paid 50k for a degree in IT / visual comm. When I
        graduated, all I learned was obsolete anyway. With the rapid
        expanse of tech, school curriculum CAN NOT keep up, making
        formal education essentially useless because they can not rapid
        deploy course materials as fast as the industry now changes.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=666074682690471346)

12. ![image](//lh6.googleusercontent.com/-4C-PBroL9Qw/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAABQE/6Ziz7GHuPdY/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Mark
    Castaneda](http://www.blogger.com/profile/00732068896140924468)[May
    8, 2014 at 12:27
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399577235096#c7552247558461015002)

    If you have an idea, web app, mobile app, entrepreneurial venture
    that you want to explore and you want to bring it to market by
    yourself this a great way to do it.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=7552247558461015002)

13. ![image](//lh4.googleusercontent.com/-3HYz2FGeMhg/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAADc/qo9E2rA1ZTI/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Szymon
    Machajewski](http://www.blogger.com/profile/07476728031464906280)[May
    8, 2014 at 12:52
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399578747612#c3935538089708569929)

    You can also get an accredited Bachelor's degree online from the
    tuition-free University of the People: http://uopeople.edu/\
    \
    The revolution in education is happening.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=3935538089708569929)

14. ![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/openid36-rounded.png)

    [learningofthefuture](http://learningofthefuture.wordpress.com/)[May
    8, 2014 at 2:09
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399583368275#c7101752688159704532)

    Good list!\
    \
    Or you can create your own path using catalog of courses:\
    http://www.eclass.cc/\
    \
    and user-created selections:\
    http://www.eclass.cc/courselists

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=7101752688159704532)

15. ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [james](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10285820790114546703)[May 8,
    2014 at 7:14
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399601672943#c5425797571469090465)

    Why no MOOCS? Hello? EdX. Coursera? Harvard's CS50? \
    What is this? 2006?\
    \
    But thanks for the links!

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5425797571469090465)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [Tori](http://www.blogger.com/profile/14565612440410282521)[May
        9, 2014 at 5:46
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399639618538#c3833055143376061068)

        Some of the courses you mention now charge. If a free and
        quality course is available and not subject to a varied schedule
        of publication, then it is preferred.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=3833055143376061068)

16. ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Aditya.Kapoor](http://www.blogger.com/profile/11983986224961221048)[May
    9, 2014 at 12:36
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399620995295#c1866740344098806940)

    Very systematic indeed! Excellent work!

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=1866740344098806940)

17. ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Tori](http://www.blogger.com/profile/14565612440410282521)[May 9,
    2014 at 5:45
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399639538457#c3444908323074727138)

    I would love to see this applied to other degrees also. It can be
    difficult to gather all the information when you are unfamiliar with
    the college process. Thanks for creating the list!

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=3444908323074727138)

18. ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Paul](http://www.blogger.com/profile/01808868095233192341)[May 9,
    2014 at 7:07
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399644472821#c5154531048522145589)

    I guess i can quit school now

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5154531048522145589)

19. ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [User](http://www.blogger.com/profile/08595781925896755815)[May 9,
    2014 at 3:27
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399674443467#c5586479689916370150)

    Any version control systems classes out there? I haven't seen it
    much in university syllabi, but it is SO useful in the real world.
    Also, there is an update on the iOS class that stanford does that
    incorporates iOS7.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5586479689916370150)

20. ![image](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_rCq2Oc4ULD4/S-OIAj0D2fI/AAAAAAAAAH8/1U3oVfHnYHc/S45/CelinaMac.jpg)

    [CelinaMac](http://www.blogger.com/profile/00935225880173355124)[May
    10, 2014 at 7:59
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399777169311#c6457343000041972332)

    Thank you for your generosity!

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=6457343000041972332)

21. ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-GRLnh95JIjw/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAWw/pu9DeY5IElM/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Fuego
    Pazzo](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10811756702463540098)[May 11,
    2014 at 10:09
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399828181493#c8077252739476840872)

    any ideas on how long this course should take assuming 5 lectures a
    week are completed?

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8077252739476840872)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [AdminX](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10568338228642310811)[May
        14, 2014 at 10:26
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400088397340#c8491892444703524771)

        I imagine it could take at least a year or two, depending on how
        much time you have.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8491892444703524771)

22. ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [Germaine
    Molele](http://www.blogger.com/profile/17148528074821600513)[May 11,
    2014 at 8:55
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399866901105#c6625866621591253111)

    Good day is there anyway that I can get the entire free computer
    science Course in zipped file downloadable via torrent because I
    can't stream vids(can't afford better internet service) they stream
    for a few seconds then lag because its buffering and having
    everything on pc would be much easier for many who is interested in
    the course

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=6625866621591253111)

23. ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-vnxgyytIwCg/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAAA/fjaqWxIk37A/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Nisarg
    Shah](http://www.blogger.com/profile/11431699932772225626)[May 11,
    2014 at 10:00
    PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399870844045#c3180243931153927968)

    I really needed something like this. I lost my interest in online
    courses for this very reason. There was too much confusion on where
    to start and where to go next. Thanks for the post!

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=3180243931153927968)

24. ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

    [ZeroVa](http://www.blogger.com/profile/01993360168725806872)[May
    12, 2014 at 8:47
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399909679375#c5784089768027809072)

    Yo, dude, this is like, hella cool. I'm so doing this next year
    while I study liberal arts. This is like, great, man. Thanks. Like,
    seriously.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5784089768027809072)

25. ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-13NtpBFqb_s/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFK8/Un52_du0fY8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Pablo
    Torre](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15832077994288927254)[May 13,
    2014 at 9:44
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399999497823#c2964148260059775974)

    Some of the comments that were talking about how the curriculum
    could be much more extensive, motivated me to do a little research
    on the subject, and I ended up putting together a list of free
    courses that can help anyone trying to go deeper into a particular
    subject. \
    \
    I will post them as blocks below.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=2964148260059775974)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-13NtpBFqb_s/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFK8/Un52_du0fY8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Pablo
        Torre](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15832077994288927254)[May
        13, 2014 at 9:45
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399999515578#c7796146354155778597)

        Introductory Courses Name Institution Objectives\
         CS50X - Introduction to Computer Science Harvard
        https://cs50.harvard.edu/ C, basic computer science\
         C++ for C programmers UC Santa Cruz
        https://www.coursera.org/course/cplusplus4c C++\
         Learn To Program: Fundamentals U Toronto
        https://www.coursera.org/course/programming1 Python, intro to
        programming\
         Learn To program: Crafting quality code U Toronto
        https://www.coursera.org/course/programming2 Python testing and
        debugging\
         Introduction to Computer Science 1 India Tech
        https://www.edx.org/course/iitbombayx/iitbombayx-cs101-1x-introduction-1447\#.U3FOPnWx3To
        C/C++ Intro to programming\
         Introduction to Computer Science 2 India Tech
        https://www.edx.org/course/iitbombayx/iitbombayx-cs101-2x-introduction-1448\#.U3FOonWx3To
        C/C++ Object Oriented Prog. \
         Intro to computing with Java HKUSTX
        https://www.edx.org/course/hkustx/hkustx-comp102x-introduction-computing-1690\#.U3FPCXWx3To
        Java, intro to CS\
         Intro to CS with Python MITx
        https://www.edx.org/course/mitx/mitx-6-00-1x-introduction-computer-1841\#.U3FPDnWx3To
        Python Intro to CS

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=7796146354155778597)

    2.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-13NtpBFqb_s/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFK8/Un52_du0fY8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Pablo
        Torre](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15832077994288927254)[May
        13, 2014 at 9:45
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399999549566#c973407614236850579)

        Basic Mathematics\
        \
        Principles of Computing Rice
        https://www.coursera.org/course/principlescomputing Mathematical
        Principles underlying CS\
        Algorithmic Thinking Rice
        https://www.coursera.org/course/algorithmicthink Mathematical
        concepts of algorithmic thinking. \
        Introduction to Logic Stanford
        https://www.coursera.org/course/intrologic \
        Analysis of Algorithms Princeton
        https://www.coursera.org/course/aofa Calculus for precise
        quantitative predictions of large combinatorial Structures\
        Analytic Combinatronics Princeton
        https://www.coursera.org/course/ac Formal methods for deriving
        functional relationships\
        Statistical Inferal John Hopkins
        https://www.coursera.org/course/statinference Part of the Data
        Science specialization\
        Data Analysis & Statistical Inference Duke
        https://www.coursera.org/course/statistics \
        Linear Algebra Through CS Brown
        https://www.coursera.org/course/matrix

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=973407614236850579)

    3.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-13NtpBFqb_s/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFK8/Un52_du0fY8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Pablo
        Torre](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15832077994288927254)[May
        13, 2014 at 9:46
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399999593125#c2388396947585653073)

        Data Structures and Algorithms \
         \
         Algorithms Part I Princeton
        https://www.coursera.org/course/algs4partI Java, algorythms,
        data types, data structures\
         Algorithms Part 2 Princeton
        https://www.coursera.org/course/algs4partII Graph processing
        algos\
         Algorithsms Design and Analysis Stanford
        https://www.coursera.org/course/algo \
        \
        Operating Systems\
        Introduction to Linux Linux Foundation
        https://www.edx.org/course/linuxfoundationx/linuxfoundationx-lfs101x-introduction-1621\#.U3FO1HWx3To
        Linux\
        Operating Systems Saylor http://www.saylor.org/courses/cs401/
        UNIX operating systems\
        \

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=2388396947585653073)

    4.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-13NtpBFqb_s/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFK8/Un52_du0fY8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Pablo
        Torre](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15832077994288927254)[May
        13, 2014 at 9:47
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399999623002#c4480602310690084376)

        Programming Languages and Methodologies \
         Programming Methodology Stanford
        http://see.stanford.edu/see/courseinfo.aspx?coll=824a47e1-135f-4508-a5aa-866adcae1111\
         Programming Abstractions Stanford
        http://see.stanford.edu/see/courseinfo.aspx?coll=11f4f422-5670-4b4c-889c-008262e09e4e\
         Programming Paradigms Stanford
        http://see.stanford.edu/see/courseinfo.aspx?coll=2d712634-2bf1-4b55-9a3a-ca9d470755ee\
        Computer Architecture \
         Computer Architecture Princeton
        https://www.coursera.org/course/comparch\
         Hardware/Software Interface Washington U
        https://www.coursera.org/course/hwswinterface\
        Networking \
         Computer Networks Washington U
        https://www.coursera.org/course/comnetworks\
         Software Defined Networking GA Tech
        https://www.coursera.org/course/sdn

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4480602310690084376)

    5.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-13NtpBFqb_s/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFK8/Un52_du0fY8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Pablo
        Torre](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15832077994288927254)[May
        13, 2014 at 9:47
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399999671949#c3413011894212217158)

        Parallel Programming \
         Heterogeneous Parallel Programming Illinois U
        https://www.coursera.org/course/hetero Parallel GPU programming\
         Massively Parallel Processors with CUDA Stanford
        https://itunes.apple.com/itunes-u/programming-massively-parallel/id384233322?mt=10\#ls=1
        Parallel GPU Programming\
        Data Bases \
         Introduction to Databases Stanford
        https://www.coursera.org/course/db Databases\
         Intro to Modern DB systems Saylor
        http://www.saylor.org/courses/cs403/ \
         Advanced Databases Saylor http://www.saylor.org/courses/cs410/
        \
        Cryptography and Security \
         Building an Information Risk Mgmtn Toolkit Washington U
        https://www.coursera.org/course/inforisk structured risk
        management approaches\
         Designing and Executing Info Security Strategies Washington U
        https://www.coursera.org/course/infosec applied information
        security knowledge\
         Information Security and Risk Mgmt in Context Washington U
        https://www.coursera.org/course/inforiskman Defend and protect
        company information\
         Cryptografy Stanford https://www.coursera.org/course/crypto
        Inner workings of cryptography on real world applications\
         Cryptografy 2 Stanford https://www.coursera.org/course/crypto2
        Inner workings of cryptography on real world applications\
        \
        Machine Learning & AI \
         \
         Machine Learning Stanford https://www.coursera.org/course/ml \
         Neural Networks for Machine Learning TorontoU
        https://www.coursera.org/course/neuralnets Neural Networlks\
         Natural Language Processing Columbia
        https://www.coursera.org/course/nlangp \
         Natural Language Processing Stanford
        http://see.stanford.edu/see/courseinfo.aspx?coll=63480b48-8819-4efd-8412-263f1a472f5a
        \
         General Game Playing Stanford
        https://www.coursera.org/course/ggp \

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=3413011894212217158)

    6.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-13NtpBFqb_s/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAFK8/Un52_du0fY8/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Pablo
        Torre](http://www.blogger.com/profile/15832077994288927254)[May
        13, 2014 at 9:49
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1399999767907#c1398466477591223880)

        And finally a few specializations and graduate studies... \
        \
        Specialization \
         CyberSecurity Specialization U Maryland
        https://www.coursera.org/specialization/cybersecurity/7?utm\_medium=courseDescripTop\
         Data Science Specialization John Hopkins
        https://www.coursera.org/specialization/jhudatascience/1?utm\_medium=courseDescripTop\
         Fundamentals of Computing RIce \
         Mobile Cloud Computing with Android
        https://www.coursera.org/specialization/mobilecloudcomputing/2?utm\_medium=listingPage\
         GaTech Masters in CS GaTech
        https://www.udacity.com/courses\#!/georgia-tech-masters-in-cs\
         Saylor Foundation Mayor in CS Saylor
        http://www.saylor.org/majors/computer-science/

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=1398466477591223880)

    7.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [AdminX](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10568338228642310811)[May
        14, 2014 at 10:27
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400088471620#c2412415608833107070)

        Hey Pablo, thanks for all these great contributions! I'll
        include them in the updated intensive track post.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=2412415608833107070)

26. ![image](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_8D59Vr5QX3k/SkVRJHT4ZBI/AAAAAAAAAFA/2ztlwMLDXBc/S45/DSC_0307.JPG)

    [Bob Z.](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04115008891036407522)[May
    14, 2014 at 8:39
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400081950940#c4861572789194146123)

    Harvard's This is CS50 course is great - updated every year (as of
    the last 3 years at least) and the professor is very engaging. They
    use mostly C, PHP, JavaScript, and the front-end langs.

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4861572789194146123)

27. ![image](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_Ha6RidNoMMM/S7-CpB95naI/AAAAAAAACe4/mSQD5J_6z_o/S45/%25E7%259B%25B8%25E7%2589%25870199.jpg)

    [linsue](http://www.blogger.com/profile/08131591745403879842)[May
    14, 2014 at 9:54
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400086487624#c4938757875205726256)

    Interesting! Based on this kind of on-line source package
    arrangement, we can list systematically other subjects in the same
    way, I am looking forward to a complete online uni which is
    equivalent with any offline uni

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=4938757875205726256)

28. ![image](//lh6.googleusercontent.com/-CVOOGpKjc0o/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAMs/sB0o3cS0v60/s512-c/photo.jpg)

    [Dirk Uys](http://www.blogger.com/profile/13454659715452137722)[May
    14, 2014 at 10:24
    AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400088273092#c8089122386039716975)

    Nice list, looks like you did some good investigation! 3 questions:\
    \
    1. Are you looking to do something like this or did you complete a
    Computer Science program?\
    2. What are your thoughts on accreditation / proof of what you've
    learned?\
    3. What about the social aspect when you do something like this. In
    a normal program you get to meet fellow students and build strong
    relationships over the span of many courses.\
    \
    ps. I'm very interested in this as part of my work (p2pu.org) and
    feel welcome to ask questions or share ideas on our forum:
    thepeople.p2pu.org

    [Reply](javascript:;)[Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=8089122386039716975)

    [Replies](javascript:;)

    1.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [AdminX](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10568338228642310811)[May
        14, 2014 at 10:47
        AM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400089654869#c6622668083432724945)

        Hi Dirk, thanks. To answer your questions:\
        1) I started teaching myself programming on my own just over a
        year ago. As I mentioned in the post, I've worked through three
        full courses from the list, and have done about half the
        lectures from a handful of others. Wish I had time to do more!\
        2) personally, I tend not to get very hung up on things like
        accreditation, and am more interested in actual learning. You
        can get a college degree with relatively high marks and not
        actually learn very much in the process. On the other hand,
        there are people who are completely self taught who excel in
        their field. From personal experience, I can say that after
        gaining some real programming skills by working through a couple
        of these courses, those new skills helped me get a new job. \
        3) That is a good point. But, there are also so many forums, IRC
        channels, websites with great communities! In addition
        (depending on where you live), there are very likely tech or
        programming meetup groups in your area, hackathons etc., where
        you can meet people with similar interests and talk about
        programming, computer science and the like.\
        \
        And thanks for the link.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=6622668083432724945)

    2.  ![image](//lh5.googleusercontent.com/-2j3iIns85eg/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAJk/Ruht5E4FYHw/s512-c/photo.jpg)

        [Chris
        Carpenter](http://www.blogger.com/profile/01101778586728020430)[May
        14, 2014 at 1:18
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400098724270#c5201969180457229834)

        AdminX, which 3 courses did you complete from the list?

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=5201969180457229834)

    3.  ![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b36-rounded.png)

        [AdminX](http://www.blogger.com/profile/10568338228642310811)[May
        14, 2014 at 1:30
        PM](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html?showComment=1400099402093#c6393561578636372722)

        I did the MIT Intro course, the UNSW Data Structures and
        Algorithms course and the Harvard Web Development class. I also
        got a significant portion of the way through the networking and
        IT security courses.

        [Delete](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=6393561578636372722)

[Add comment](javascript:;)

[Load more...](javascript:;)

[](https://www.blogger.com/comment-iframe.g?blogID=1458274389096873945&postID=7729241761257657607)

[Newer
Post](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/ancient-game-continues-to-confound.html "Newer Post")
[Older
Post](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/duck-duck-go-unveils-redesign.html "Older Post")
[Home](http://blog.agupieware.com/)

Subscribe to: [Post Comments
(Atom)](http://blog.agupieware.com/feeds/7729241761257657607/comments/default)

Search
------

Loading...

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=1458274389096873945&widgetType=CustomSearch&widgetId=CustomSearch1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Techmeme
--------

[Loading...](http://www.techmeme.com/feed.xml)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=1458274389096873945&widgetType=Feed&widgetId=Feed1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Tech News
---------

-   [Ars Technica](http://arstechnica.com/)
-   [CNET](http://news.cnet.com/)
-   [engadget](http://www.engadget.com/)
-   [Gizmodo](http://gizmodo.com/)
-   [Mac Rumors](http://www.macrumors.com/)
-   [PC Mag](http://www.pcmag.com/)
-   [Techmeme](http://www.techmeme.com/)
-   [The Next Web](http://thenextweb.com/)
-   [Torrent Freak](http://torrentfreak.com/)
-   [Wired](http://www.wired.com/)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=1458274389096873945&widgetType=LinkList&widgetId=LinkList1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Subscribe
---------

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Posts

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-netvibes.png)](http://www.netvibes.com/subscribe.php?url=http%3A%2F%2Fblog.agupieware.com%2Ffeeds%2Fposts%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-yahoo.png)](http://add.my.yahoo.com/content?url=http%3A%2F%2Fblog.agupieware.com%2Ffeeds%2Fposts%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png)
Atom](http://blog.agupieware.com/feeds/posts/default)

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Posts

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Comments

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-netvibes.png)](http://www.netvibes.com/subscribe.php?url=http%3A%2F%2Fblog.agupieware.com%2Ffeeds%2F7729241761257657607%2Fcomments%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/widgets/subscribe-yahoo.png)](http://add.my.yahoo.com/content?url=http%3A%2F%2Fblog.agupieware.com%2Ffeeds%2F7729241761257657607%2Fcomments%2Fdefault)
[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png)
Atom](http://blog.agupieware.com/feeds/7729241761257657607/comments/default)

![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/widgets/arrow_dropdown.gif)
![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon_feed12.png) Comments

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=1458274389096873945&widgetType=Subscribe&widgetId=Subscribe1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Archive
-------

-   [May](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014_05_01_archive.html) (8)
-   [April](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014_04_01_archive.html) (23)
-   [March](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014_03_01_archive.html) (21)
-   [February](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014_02_01_archive.html) (23)
-   [January](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014_01_01_archive.html) (25)
-   [December](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_12_01_archive.html) (24)
-   [November](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_11_01_archive.html) (22)
-   [October](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_10_01_archive.html) (26)
-   [September](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_09_01_archive.html) (24)
-   [August](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_08_01_archive.html) (25)
-   [July](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_07_01_archive.html) (26)
-   [June](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_06_01_archive.html) (26)
-   [May](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_05_01_archive.html) (26)
-   [April](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_04_01_archive.html) (24)
-   [March](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_03_01_archive.html) (22)
-   [February](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_02_01_archive.html) (19)
-   [January](http://blog.agupieware.com/2013_01_01_archive.html) (24)
-   [December](http://blog.agupieware.com/2012_12_01_archive.html) (10)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=1458274389096873945&widgetType=BlogArchive&widgetId=BlogArchive1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar-right-1 "Edit")

Powered by [Blogger](http://www.blogger.com).

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=1458274389096873945&widgetType=Attribution&widgetId=Attribution1&action=editWidget&sectionId=footer-3 "Edit")

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/05/online-learning-bachelors-level.html
