[Survey by Qualaroo](https://qualaroo.com/)

-   [First Round Capital](http://firstround.com/)
-   [The Review](http://firstround.com/review/)
-   [Plusstartup](http://designplusstartup.com/)
-   [Jobs](http://firstround.com/jobs/)

[![image](http://firstround.com/img/frr_logo_3.png)](/review/)
==============================================================

-   [The Review](/review/)
-   [Management and Company
    Building](/review/category/Management-and-Company-Building)
-   [The Brain Hacks Top Founders Use to Get the Job Done](#)

The Brain Hacks Top Founders Use to Get the Job Done
====================================================

**[Katia Verresen](http://www.kvacoaching.com/)'s new client had a big
problem**: He needed to find 3 to 4 extra hours in his day. This, of
course, seemed like an impossible feat for an oversubscribed startup
founder, but his ability to fundraise and recruit the best talent
depended on it. By the time he met Verresen, executive coach to many
such founders, he was drained, pessimistic, dreading every week before
it started.

Even though tech culture champions sleeplessness, overtime and burnout,
Verresen has seen how this mindset can lead to failure. To turn it
around, her first order of business is to collect as much data on her
clients as she can and funnel it into a plan with one goal: **Maximizing
energy**. Physical energy, emotional energy, and mental energy. These
are the components of successful execution that are too often
overlooked.

But the proof is in the pudding. After adopting Verresen's
recommendations, her exhausted client said he felt like he had 60% more
energy during the day, had a more hopeful outlook, and — by getting more
done in the morning — found the four hours he needed in the evening.
"Most importantly, he remembered that this was his for the taking,"
Verresen says. "He found control over his life so he could enjoy it
again, while also closing on the funding he needed and building out his
executive team."

Her method has turned [Verresen](http://www.kvacoaching.com/) into one
of the most sought after coaches in the business.

* * * * *

**Filling Your Buckets**

Maintaining and using energy wisely might seem like obvious advice, but
it’s hardly ever heeded. “How many times a day do you hear people
bragging about how little sleep they got? Saying that they will just
power through the next two weeks?” It’s common parlance for the
entrepreneurial set. But it's rarely indicative of progress, Verresen
says.

Instead, she encourages her clients to visualize three types of energy
as buckets that need to be filled:

-   **Physical Energy:** The foundation of everything you do. It's the
    type of energy that's most easily influenced but most often
    neglected (i.e. “All I’ve had today is Diet Coke,” “I can totally
    function on three hours of sleep”).
-   **Emotional Energy:** How you're feeling at any given moment —
    excited, anxious, hopeless, etc. It dictates more than half of your
    behavior and decision making.
-   **Mental Energy:** The highest order of energy, only achievable when
    you have the physical and emotional stamina to be observant,
    perceptive, and focus.

When these three buckets build on each other, people have a chance to
reach what Verresen calls their “**performance-plus**” state. Some might
call it flow, or “the zone” — it's that fluid productivity that can
exponentially increase what you’re capable of as a leader in much less
time.

This is where Verresen comes in — to offer a formula for achieving
performance-plus as often as possible.

“To me, coaching isn’t just about changing someone’s environment, or
tweaking their behavior — I don’t think that really works,” she says.
“You have to change their belief systems. When someone becomes a leader,
their external identity changes. To succeed, their internal identity has
to catch up.”

Subscribe to get fresh insights in your inbox.

Join Us

[** **](http://feeds.feedburner.com/firstround/TbEd/)

> If it was true that people can't change, we wouldn't have some of the
> most amazing companies we have today.

To gather the data she needs to urge this shift, Verresen not only has
her clients audit their behavior, she conducts one-on-one meetings with
the people they work with most. She collects a 360-degree inventory of
how they interact, how their energy fluctuates throughout the day and
how this impacts the decisions they make.

**Entrepreneurism as Endurance Sport**

Most people know the core components of physical energy: enough sleep,
eating right, exercise. But the dropoff between the people who know
these rules and those who follow them is massive. On top of this,
there's a lot going on physically that people don't even realize.

“So much of what we feel is instinctual, and we don’t know how to
identify it," Verresen says. "If you’re a founder or a manager and you
really track your physical sensations, you’d realize that you probably
spend most of your time in ‘fight or flight’ mode.”

Humans needed this high-adrenaline setting when we were still part of
the food chain. Now it surfaces in board meetings, product releases,
whenever a threat is “perceived” even if there isn’t one. “The thing
about ‘fight or flight’ is that it burns through our energy without us
even knowing it,” she says. This is why preserving physical energy where
you can is crucial.

**To get a sense of her clients’ physical reserves, Verresen asks them
several basic questions:** How alert do they feel generally? What are
their sleeping patterns like? Do they find time to exercise? Do they
often take breaks between meetings or do they stack them back-to-back?
What is their level of engagement in meetings?

Then she goes granular. Using a spreadsheet, she has them plot how alert
they feel versus how tired they feel on an hourly basis. She has them do
this for a stretch of three days to a week — enough time to see a
pattern emerge.

“When you track things this closely, it becomes a movie you can replay.
And when we look at the movie together, we can identify blocks of time
where they are clearly more alert on a regular basis, and times when
they are not.”

This extends beyond “being a morning person,” Verresen says. It’s
knowing what hours of the day you are capable of higher-level thought.
When can you tackle the gnarliest problems? When are you able to invest
energy in tasks that aren’t easy or don’t have known solutions?

Verresen is a big fan of a tactic called “**calendar blocking**,” and
she encourages her clients to identify the chunks of time on their
calendars when they have the most physical energy for work. She has them
do the same for the hours where they have less energy so they can plug
in easy or lower-intensity tasks at those times.

> Engineering your calendar to follow your personal energy pattern gives
> your productivity a huge boost.

Verresen has worked with a number of clients who were sure they were
late-night workers. They claim to get the most done between the hours of
7 p.m. and 3 a.m. But when she reviews their energy logs, it’s obvious
that they're only evening workers because they spend their days in
meetings or being interrupted. Their only chance to focus is in the
evening. This doesn’t mean they’re doing their best work at that time.
Many of them work late, miss out on sleep, and then can’t handle
anything in the morning — even though they’d otherwise be morning
people.

Sleep is not as negotiable as people want it to be, and bargaining with
it is the number one mistake Verresen sees people make. “[Anders
Ericcson has a famous
study](http://graphics8.nytimes.com/images/blogs/freakonomics/pdf/DeliberatePractice(PsychologicalReview).pdf)
showing that the world’s best violinists slept an average of 8.5 hours
every day to stay on top. For truly top performers, 8 hours are
recommended," she says. "I’ll meet people all the time who say they are
just fine with 3 or 4 hours, but you always end up paying that back in
what you’re able to accomplish.”

To compensate, Verresen advocates naps. And if those aren’t possible,
taking 10 minute breaks every 90 minutes to 2 hours becomes a saving
grace. It doesn’t have to be a long break. It could just be standing up
and stretching your legs, or getting a glass of water — but it should
involve looking away from your screen and paying attention to your
breath.

**This is so important that she recommends her clients set a timer on
their phones to remind them to take a literal breather.**

“People tend to know these things, but when they are in fight or flight
mode, they tell themselves they don’t have time for it, that they can’t
possibly afford a context switch. The the goal shouldn’t be to push
through, it should be to relieve this tension.”

One of fight or flight’s dead giveaways is a rapid heart beat. But this
is easy to shake. Deep breathing is one very basic but proven tactic to
elevate yourself out of this state — you want to feel the breath in your
belly. It also helps to count your breaths. And, fairly quickly, you’ll
start to feel more in sync with yourself, Verresen says.

“Without physical energy, we can’t even talk about emotional or mental
energy,” she says. “But still, it’s the most easily disregarded.” This
is a giant mistake, because your physical energy isn’t just about you,
it’s about everyone around you too.

“Your energy level shows up in meetings, in the little things like body
language,” she says. “Maybe you appear less engaged. You get impatient
or frustrated that much faster. And your employees notice. The smallest
ticks that you don’t even register change how people perceive you, how
in control you are, their relationship to you. You think no one could
possibly notice, but when I talk to their colleagues, it comes out right
away.”

If people want to try peer coaching, Verresen recommends partnering with
a colleague and walking through each other’s days to match alertness
with high and low levels of efficiency. The important thing is to never
edit anything out. Only then will you realize where you lost
opportunities because you were tired, she says.

**Learning Emotional Intelligence**

For Verresen, EQ has taken on new meaning. The assumed definition is
social savvy, but it’s really a strategic approach to managing emotions
that makes the biggest difference.

With the same chart they use to track physical sensations, Verresen also
asks her clients to gauge their feelings throughout the day. To help,
she gives them a chart codifying the spectrum of human emotions. At the
top of the chart, you’re operating with performance-plus speed and
agility. At the bottom, you not only feel demotivated, but helpless.

![image](http://frcs3.s3.amazonaws.com.global.prod.fastly.net/library/rowImage/KVA_Emotion.jpg)

The goal is not for clients to always feel good about themselves and
their work. Everyone is going to have low moments. Entrepreneurship is
one big roller coaster. Rather, the objective is to give clients the
tools and language they need to slingshot themselves from the bottom of
this chart to the top when they need to.

“The first thing you need to do to fill that emotional energy bucket is
become more self-aware,” Verresen says. “You already have a time set on
your phone to take physical breaks. Take that time to really check in
with yourself — what are you feeling at that moment? Taking your
emotional pulse gives you a sense of how much juice you have left to get
things done.”

> If physical energy is your car, emotional energy is how much gas you
> have in the tank.

“All the time I hear people say, ‘I just need to get through the next
two weeks, or the next month, or whatever. It sounds horrible but it’s
become the norm,” she says. “The question is, then what? Do you really
think you’re going to feel that much different? When we really start to
look at our emotions, they become more predictable than you would ever
imagine.”

When you have the data showing you always feel demotivated or anxious
between 3 and 5 p.m. in the afternoon, you have the power to choose
something different. “When my clients finally see their palette of
emotions, I always tell them, now you can play with it.”

Making these changes starts first thing in the morning.

“The mood you wake up in is critical. Consider it to be the default font
for your entire day. Think about it — when you wake up in a bad mood, it
usually turns out to be a bad day. But if you’re aware of this, you can
push the refresh button.”

This is also the time of day when the link between physical and
emotional energy is most apparent. “When you’re physically tired, your
buffer to regroup from stress or to shift out of a mood is vastly
diminished. You’re basically unable to be emotionally resilient.”

**This has proven to be so true that Verresen actually tells her clients
that if they haven’t gotten enough sleep, they shouldn’t take their
emotions seriously the next day.** They won’t be indicative of what’s
actually happening. And when you’re *really* tired, it’s probably a good
day to disengage, work from home, cancel meetings, focus on easier tasks
if you can.

Another big part of changing your emotions is understanding their
triggers. Once a client has charted their emotions for several days,
**Verresen asks them the following questions:** Before their most
positive and negative emotions set in, who were they with? What were
they doing? Especially if they were feeling good and their mood suddenly
dropped, what changed?

If you know your triggers, you can decide whether to respond to them or
not.

“Whenever someone tells me a meeting was challenging, instead of asking
why I’ll ask what happened right beforehand. Usually that’s where the
real answer is. Maybe they saw some discouraging data, or had a rough
call."

The trick to busting triggers in these situations is to capture emotions
and leave them behind. “People go from meeting to meeting without
thinking that one influences their performance or responses in another,”
Verresen says. “As a people, we give ourselves zero transition time, and
the result is emotional transference.”

To prevent this spillover, you have to be very intentional about leaving
baggage behind. “I tell my clients to imagine they are carrying
suitcases and setting them down. This isn’t easy. It takes commitment
and practice."

One especially counterproductive emotion Verresen sees is “comparison.”
When it comes to high performers, it can be deeply destructive. “People
think they are motivating themselves by comparing their level of success
to others, but the underlying feeling is insecurity, powerlessness to
change. It’s the easiest way to sacrifice all of your emotional energy.”

Comparison leads to anger and disappointment. This is bad enough,
because it blinds you to other possibilities and stalls productivity.
But on the outside — to colleagues and direct reports — it shows up as
impatience, which can be even more toxic.

“This is a really big one with founders and leaders in tech because they
naturally do things so fast, and they expect the same from everyone
around them,” Verresen says. “They confuse impatience with efficiency.
They feel like they are pushing things forward, but really they’re just
spreading their anxiety.”

To flip this script, Verresen asks her clients to remember a time when
things were operating efficiently. How did they feel when everything was
running smoothly? Every time, they will say that they were feeling good
— not anxious, not overworked, excited about the future. When you’re
impatiently shoving things along, you don’t have any of these feelings.

Luckily, just like you can trick your heart into slowing down, you can
trick your brain into thinking more positively by accessing memories.
When you dwell for several minutes in the memory of something you were
proud of, something you built, something that worked well, you will feel
a psychological shift. And if you’re too upset to think about work at
all, the same thing can be accomplished by thinking about something you
really appreciate. It might be your family, or your dog, or beating
Uncharted 3. It could be a time you felt safe or that you truly
belonged.

**When you take the time to recall these memories in elaborate detail,
your brain lets go of the present and chemically changes.**

“As an example, some of my clients are big into skiing and get into the
zone on the mountain,” Verresen says. “So, when they get frustrated and
need extra emotional energy, I tell them to visualize what it’s like to
sail effortlessly down the slope. Same thing when they notice a trigger
that could lead down the emotional spectrum, they can choose to
front-load their brains with positive thoughts.”

Again, this may sound straightforward, but evolution isn’t on our side,
she says. Because we were on the food chain for so long, humanity is
biased to be negative and paranoid. “This is why it’s so easy for us to
forget the moments when we felt good. You see it all the time in
performance reviews. People don’t even hear the good stuff, they obsess
over their areas for growth. Even if they just hit a big goal, they're
already focused on the next problem.”

> We delete our wins so easily. No wonder we don't see possibilities for
> the future.

Celebrating and revisiting recent achievements is the best way to
re-wire your brain for clarity, Verresen says. This is especially
important for CEOs and founders because it’s their responsibility to set
the tone for everyone else — at all-hands meetings, in one-on-ones, with
their board. “You need to not only recall wins for yourself, but to make
everyone else really feel and savor them so they can draw emotional
energy from them too.”

**The Transformative Power of Mental Energy**

True clarity comes with mental energy. And while it’s not possible
unless your physical and emotional buckets are already full, it can make
the difference between being a good leader and an iconic leader.

“Mental energy is the ability to separate yourself from your thoughts,”
Verresen says. “Everyday, we have millions of thoughts that cause
stress, anxiety, depression — that can stall you out in a million
different ways — **but you don’t have to believe them**.”

Entrepreneurs are a worrying lot. They worry that things are taking
longer than they should, that they aren’t hiring the right people, that
they won’t close that next round of funding. The one things these
thoughts all have in common is that none of them have played out. All
they do is distort reality until, suddenly, you’re paralyzed.

Another quality entrepreneurs share: they often get away without paying
full attention or investing their brainpower. Most of them have always
been able to do this, since primary school all the way up through
college. They’ve put in minimal mental energy but still succeeded,
Verresen says. But when you’re building a company, you can’t just skate
by.

“Mental energy allows you to have a much fuller view of what’s actually
happening within your company and on your team,” she says. “When you
have a lot of mental energy, your mind is like a video camera, picking
up everything in every room and every situation. It also lets you
observe without jumping to conclusions or making assumptions.”

True mental agility gives you the ability to read people without
projecting anything onto them. Verresen recommends practicing this by
noticing and taking responsibility for your projections when they
happen. For example, if you’re feeling down about some data, and you
notice yourself blaming a colleague for failing to make more progress —
are you really criticizing your own performance? Call yourself out.

When you become familiar with the thoughts that take you out of your
flow, you can see them coming and respond differently for a more
powerful outcome. In meditation, people are instructed to notice when
their minds stray from the present moment and gently guide them back.
Similarly, Verresen advises clients to recognize destructive thinking
patterns and steer themselves back to the task at hand.

“You hold onto your mental energy by observing yourself inwardly without
buying into everything,” she says. “This is the part of your brain that
notices what is going on and asks, ‘Are these thoughts I’m having even
true?’”

**There are several indicators that you're running low on mental
energy:**

-   You find yourself mired in assumptions about things largely out of
    your control. Why did someone quit? How are things eventually going
    to fall apart? Is it all your fault?
-   You can’t focus on a single task for more than a few minutes. You’re
    clicking off to Gchat or Facebook or anything other than what you
    need to get done.
-   You look at the next task on your list and you already feeling
    overwhelmed.
-   You're only reactive — all your work is short-term with no
    connection to long-term vision.

A lot of this has to do with feeling trapped — trapped in your head, in
the moment, in a bad situation.

“The best way to reset your mental energy is to get it up and out into
the physical world,” Verresen says. “Screens don’t count. You should put
whatever it is that’s bothering you or that you need to get done up on a
white board. Write it down and stick it up on a wall. Put some space
around it. We all spend hours in our heads, staring into these little
boxes. We need space to think.”

**Giving something space also means giving it time.** Verresen advises
her clients to block off two slots ranging between 90 minutes to 2 hours
every week as **mental white space**. They need to literally put it on
their calendar and make sure they aren’t interrupted or disturbed during
this time — ideally they shouldn’t have meetings right afterwards
either.

“This time needs to be untouchable and scheduled during a period when
you’re at your most alert,” she says. “The goal is to zoom out and to
think through what’s going on at the present moment, and what you’d like
to do in the future. This is where creative solutions and good ideas
come from.”

This time should also be spent wherever they feel most comfortable and
safe. Verresen personally recommends getting away from where you usually
work, just to shift your perspective and limit chance of distraction.

> When people have space, they are amplified. When they feel cramped,
> their abilities contract.

If possible, Verresen also recommends that her clients structure times
when people definitely can interrupt and interact with them. Scheduled
one-on-ones are an obvious need, but office hours have also proven to be
effective at limiting interruption and distraction across the board.
Especially when a company enters the growth phase and new people join,
this can become a lifesaver. It maintains the image of having an
open-door policy without the time suck.

“A lot of leaders feel like they are doing a good job as long as they're
responsive or helping a bunch of other people with their needs,”
Verresen says. “If they spend most of their time doing this, it usually
means they're ignoring bigger, more important priorities.”

**Putting it All Together**

**Fundraising is one of the most stressful experiences tech founders
endure**. It puts a tax on all three buckets of energy. There’s the lack
of sleep. There are the ups and downs of pitches being rejected,
accepted, torn apart. There's the non-stop interaction as they book
meeting after meeting while still running their companies day-to-day.

“It becomes vital for you to manage your triggers,” Verresen says.
“Investors express mixed emotions in every meeting, and when you leave
you might feel terrible about yourself and your company. You have to be
able to ask yourself, ‘Whose emotions are these?’ and put a boundary
between yourself and the people you interact with."

Simultaneously, it becomes more important than ever to stock your mind
with positive emotional reserves. “You have to constantly think back on
what you've built, what you’re proud of, and the people you work with
who you admire,” she says. “If you're in this business, you believe
fiercely in what you're doing, so you have to ground yourself in that
certainty that the money will come sooner or later. You shouldn’t buy
into the worry or anxiety before it happens.”

Valuing yourself and your team becomes your number one defense against
bottoming out. Just like you’d put on your own oxygen mask before
assisting someone else on a plane, you need to take care of yourself
first. Make sure you’re getting enough sleep, double up on your
emotional check-ins, crack down on thoughts that aren't absolutely true.
For momentum, focus on what’s working to counter-balance the natural
negative bias.

“Fundraising is a marathon, but most people treat it like it’s a sprint
and deplete all their resources right away,” Verresen says. “You can’t
afford this. You need the mental energy to check your ego at the door,
to realize that your negative feelings are normal but not predictive of
the outcome.”

More importantly, you need mental energy to be thoughtful about the
fundraising process. If you’re desperate to close a round just for the
security, you won’t consider why you want to work with specific
investors.

“**You want to come out of a fundraising round with a group of strategic
thought partners, not just the money**,” Verresen reminds her clients.
“You need to have the clarity to think about what needs to happen after
the money hits your account. That’s what will determine your success in
the long run.”

If you’re not careful, you end up going into pitches low on the
emotional spectrum. That’s when prospective investors start looking a
lot like the enemy. “If you make these people your enemy, you could miss
out on a range of opportunities,” Verresen says. “You miss all the
things working in your favor. You might not get the funding you wanted,
but if you're observant and present yourself well, you could get it
later — or you could get an invaluable mentor or advisor.”

Once the money is in the bank, it’s mandatory that you acknowledge the
magnitude of the achievement.

“So often the depth of the stress and panic over fundraising drowns out
the relief you feel once it’s over. You have to celebrate that win as
thoroughly as possible. It’ll become one more tool in your belt when you
need to give yourself vital boost in the future.”

Intel CEO Andy Grove contended that [*Only the Paranoid
Survive*](http://www.amazon.com/Only-Paranoid-Survive-Exploit-Challenge/dp/0385483821).
But Verresen disagrees. It's the people who have the mental fortitude to
be fearless who survive *and*enjoy the ride.

Subscribe by Email Sign Up

### Read These Next

[![image](http://frcs3.s3.amazonaws.com.global.prod.fastly.net/library/mainImage/23OCT_First_Round_Capital-232.jpg)](/article/Twitter-Engineering-SVP-Chris-Fry-on-the-Power-of-Stable-Teams)

[](/article/Twitter-Engineering-SVP-Chris-Fry-on-the-Power-of-Stable-Teams)

### Unlocking the Power of Stable Teams with Twitter’s SVP of Engineering

“One of the most scalable organizations in human history was the Roman
army. Its defining unit: The squad — eight guys. The number of guys that
could fit in a tent.” This is Twitter Engineering SVP Chris Fry on
history’s greatest example of successful hyper-growth, and the tactic
that made it possible: stable team building. The moment your
organization hits 40 engineers, this should be the number one thing on
your mind, he says. When you’re small, everyone sits in one room and
everything works. As you grow, things start to break. “That’s when you
need to take all your engineering knowledge and apply it to your team,
and you want to end up with a modular system where teams become the unit
of scale,” Fry says. Getting bigger doesn’t have to mean getting slower.
After leading engineering at both Salesforce and Twitter during their
hyper-growth stages, Fry has seen how team structure can make the
difference between zero products shipped and fluid productivity. “With
the team structure the Roman legion created, they were able to dominate
500 years of history and create a distributed network that ruled the
Western world. If you can create a similar structure, you can rule the
world too.” He shared his tips for building this structure at First
Round’s last CTO Summit.

[![image](http://frcs3.s3.amazonaws.com.global.prod.fastly.net/library/mainImage/dollarsign.jpg)](/article/This-Product-Prioritization-System-Nabbed-Pandora-More-Than-70-Million-Active-Monthly-Users-with-Just-40-Engineers)

[](/article/This-Product-Prioritization-System-Nabbed-Pandora-More-Than-70-Million-Active-Monthly-Users-with-Just-40-Engineers)

### This Product Prioritization System Nabbed Pandora 70 Million Monthly Users with Just 40 Engineers

When it went public in 2011, over a decade after the company’s founding,
Pandora employed fewer than 40 engineers. With this skeleton crew, the
company built products for 70 million monthly users on the web, iOS,
Android, Windows Phone, a thousand consumer electronic devices, and in
over 100 types of cars. It also generated half a billion in revenue —
laying the groundwork for its $7 billion valuation today. Compared to
Twitter and Facebook, with their armies of engineers, Pandora is one of
those rare Hail Mary success stories that keeps entrepreneurs and
investors betting on long-shots. From day one, it pushed against
constraints that these other companies didn’t have. Namely, the fact
that it had to hand a huge chunk of its funding over to the music
industry, leaving it with a scrappy budget that forces companies to stay
lean and get creative. That’s how the Pandora prioritization process was
born. In an exclusive First Round CTO Summit talk, Tom Conrad — the
company’s CTO since 2004 — broke down how the company figured out the
exact right things to build fast and literally demanded buy-in from
stakeholders (albeit with fake money, as you’ll see).

[![image](http://frcs3.s3.amazonaws.com.global.prod.fastly.net/library/mainImage/Rosenstein.jpg)](/article/Asanas-Justin-Rosenstein-on-the-One-Quality-Every-Startup-Needs-to-Survive)

[](/article/Asanas-Justin-Rosenstein-on-the-One-Quality-Every-Startup-Needs-to-Survive)

### Asana’s Justin Rosenstein on the One Quality Every Startup Needs to Survive

Justin Rosenstein wasn’t sure what had happened. One of his company’s
highest performing engineers seemed to have lost his enthusiasm for the
work. “He had gone from super dedicated to detached,” says the
co-founder of Asana, an app that powers teamwork without email.
“Something wasn’t right. He seemed to be in an existential funk.” So he
took him for a walk and asked one simple question: “What’s wrong?” At
first, the engineer couldn't pinpoint the source of his malaise. Then he
said, “I’m not sure what I’m doing here. I wonder, should I even be
writing software?” Rosenstein was struck. Sure, the company had grown,
but what had changed? Instead of reciting a normal pep talk, he started
asking questions. “When you go back to your desk, what’s the next line
of code you’ll write?” he asked. The engineer explained he was repairing
a chunk of old code. “Why?” Rosenstein asked. And with every answer he
asked again, “Why?” Finally the engineer said, “It will make the site
faster, which will let people communicate with their teammates more
quickly.” This was the breakthrough. “So it will allow more people to
accomplish their goals?” Rosenstein asked. “I looked at him, and he
looked at me, and it was just like, okay, he was ready to get back to
work.” He had stumbled upon that one, critical missing ingredient — an
ingredient that Rosenstein and Asana’s leadership have accepted as key
to their success: Clarity.

### Read These Next

-   [Unlocking the Power of Stable Teams with Twitter’s SVP of
    Engineering](/article/Twitter-Engineering-SVP-Chris-Fry-on-the-Power-of-Stable-Teams)
-   [This Product Prioritization System Nabbed Pandora 70 Million
    Monthly Users with Just 40
    Engineers](/article/This-Product-Prioritization-System-Nabbed-Pandora-More-Than-70-Million-Active-Monthly-Users-with-Just-40-Engineers)
-   [Asana’s Justin Rosenstein on the One Quality Every Startup Needs to
    Survive](/article/Asanas-Justin-Rosenstein-on-the-One-Quality-Every-Startup-Needs-to-Survive)

We have chosen to not use bylines because we believe the voice and
insights provided by our subjects are the highest priority. Exceptions
include guest columns and contributed articles. Have feedback? [Click
here](mailto:camille@firstround.com) to email Editor Camille Ricketts.

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

-   [about](http://firstround.com/About/) [expand](#)
-   [companies](http://firstround.com/companies/) [expand](#)
-   [people](http://firstround.com/people/) [expand](#)
-   [the review](http://firstround.com/review/)
-   [contact](http://firstround.com/contact/)
-   [jobs](http://firstround.com/jobs/)

-   [Investment Team](http://firstround.com/about/#investment)
-   [How we Work](http://firstround.com/about/#howwework)
-   [Network](http://firstround.com/about/#network)
-   [Business Development](http://firstround.com/about/#bizdev)
-   [Learning &
    Development](http://firstround.com/about/#learninganddev)
-   [Research](http://firstround.com/about/#research)
-   [Talent](http://firstround.com/about/#talent)

-   [Investment Team](http://firstround.com/people/#investment)
-   [Platform Team](http://firstround.com/people/#platform)
-   [Founders](http://firstround.com/people/#community)

-   [First Round
    Capital](http://firstround.com/library/category/first-round-capital)
-   [Design](http://firstround.com/library/category/design)
-   [Management And Company
    Building](http://firstround.com/library/category/management-and-company-building)

-   [Portfolio](http://firstround.com/companies/#portfolio)
-   [Categories](http://firstround.com/companies/#categories)
-   [Location](http://firstround.com/companies/#location)
-   [Exited](http://firstround.com/companies/#exited)

© 2014 First Round Capital.

[facebook](http://www.facebook.com/firstroundcapital)
[twitter](https://twitter.com/firstround/)

[LP Login](https://investor.firstround.com/session/new)

© 2014 First Round Capital. All Rights Reserved

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://firstround.com/article/The-Brain-Hacks-Top-Founders-Use-to-Get-Stuff-Done
