[joshwhiton.com](http://joshwhiton.com/)
========================================

-   [**Writings**](http://joshwhiton.com/)
-   [Photos](http://www.flickr.com/photos/subterfuge/sets/72157634426662473/)
-   [TransLoc](http://joshwhiton.com/transloc/)
-   [Community Garden](http://joshwhiton.com/community-garden/)
-   [EVXP](http://joshwhiton.com/evxp/)
-   [Raleigh City Farm](http://joshwhiton.com/raleigh-city-farm/)
-   [About](http://joshwhiton.com/about/)
-   

[Follow @joshwhiton](https://twitter.com/joshwhiton)

[My Ridiculous Treadmill Desk](http://joshwhiton.com/lifestyle-design/treadmill-desk/ "Permalink to My Ridiculous Treadmill Desk")
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### June 30th, 2014

I’ve finished building my second treadmill desk. Now I have one at both
my east and west coast basecamps.

[![treaddesk](http://joshwhiton.com/wp-content/uploads/treaddesk-238x300.jpg)](http://joshwhiton.com/wp-content/uploads/treaddesk.jpg)

As the name implies, a treadmill desk (aka tread-desk or walking desk)
is the mashup of a treadmill with a desk. And it lets computer users
*replace* sitting with walking.

Sitting, it turns out, is terrible for us. So terrible in [so many
ways](http://joshwhiton.com/wp-content/uploads/Sitting.pdf) that I won’t
even begin to list them here. The real surprise though, comes from a
[study that
shows](http://jnci.oxfordjournals.org/content/106/7/dju206.full) that
even regular exercise can’t undo all the damage.

The goal then is not merely to supplement sitting with exercise but
rather to *not sit*. For those of us whose lives are primarily mental,
where “acting” on our ideas tends to be effected by sitting in meetings,
sitting on phone calls, and sitting while wiggling our fingers at our
keyboard, a tread-desk may be the single best thing we can do for our
health and longevity.

So why have I titled this post my “ridiculous” treadmill desk? Because
part of me recognizes that the whole thing is ludicrous. Right now I’m
writing this post while striding atop an ugly motorized hunk of metal
and plastic, from inside a house, on a farm, in the middle of a redwood
forest.

Why am I in here instead of out there?

Because computer interfaces are about a million miles off from being
reconciled with our million-year-old anatomy. Despite my brain and body
having evolved “out there”, my primary tool of expression involves
staring fixedly into a small glowing rectangle and tapping on it.

This is today’s default stance of productivity. And it’s gotta go.

One day computer interfaces will level up. And from Google Glass, Leap
Motion, various eye-tracking startups, etc. we know that preparations
are under way. Then we’ll be able to access all the information we need
even while walking around *outside* with all that wide-screen, high-res
reality. No keyboard, no monitor… no treadmill. The concept of the
office itself will undergo another radical change.

Till then I am glad to have this kludge of a treadmill desk. And if you
want to be around to see the future happen you might consider getting
one too.

\
 Now on to some details for those who want to get walking and working.

Standing Desk vs Walking Desk: I have of course tried standing desks
before this. While some improvement over sitting, they are inferior.
While standing I have found myself surprisingly capable of finding ways
to slouch. Sometimes I would end up with belly out and hands on my hips
(the pregnant look). Sometimes I would end up hunched over with my
elbows on the desk. And after a half hour or so some part of me would
always begin to ache — probably because we didn’t evolve to sit or stand
stationary for long periods either. The treadmill desk doesn’t seem
prone to the same abuses. Nor does it cause me any pain. When my
treadmill automatically shuts off after 90 minutes I am always like,
“What? Already?”

Speed — People are surprised how slowly I walk at my desk: usually about
0.5 mph. The reason is that I find my typing error rate increases the
more my body bounces around. At low speeds my typing doesn’t suffer at
all. For me, this is not about “cardio”. This is simply about not
sitting. That’s it. That’s all.

Cost — Brand new, you can snag a desk-friendly treadmill for around
$500, or a ready-made treadmill desk for two or three times that amount.
Me, I prefer to get unwanted treadmills used off Craigslist. It just
makes me feel good to not make the planet cough up another hundred
pounds of metal and plastic needlessly.

The first treadmill I got of CL for free because it was “broken”. Two
hours later, after soldering a loose wire on the circuit board and
tightening the drive belt it was good as new. The second treadmill I got
off CL in perfect working condition for $35.

This strategy leaves you to fashion the desk part somehow. And while the
productivity freak in me considers it a low-leverage waste of time,
another part of me relishes the chance to actually use some tools and do
something constructively tactile.

Consider it a brain-training exercise. We know it’s good for the brain
to be challenged with unfamiliar activity and resourcefulness. I like
trying to build my desks out of materials lying around and abiding by
those constraints has led to some elegant designs: my first desk was a
single sheet of wood and string, my second used a scrap 2×4”, a
discarded plywood shelf, and a few inches of pvc.

Noise — If you’re in an office environment noise is a real concern,
especially for the $35 Craiglist special. There are exercise treadmills
out there that are whisper quiet but you’ll need to find out which ones.
I assume the new generation of treadmills geared for desk use are a fair
bit quieter.



This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://joshwhiton.com/lifestyle-design/treadmill-desk/
