[![image](/_resources/images/subscribe_now.gif)](https://ezsub.net/isapi/foxisapi.dll/main.sv.run?jt=starr_wc&PUBID=528&SOURCE=INET&RDRID=&SBTYPE=QN&PGTP=S)[![image](http://www.democracyjournal.org/_resources/images/donate_democracy.gif)](http://www.democracyjournal.org/donate.php)

[![image](/_resources/images/logo.gif)](/index.php)

[Submit](#)

![image](/_resources/images/sign_up_text.gif)

[Submit](#)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![image](/_resources/navimages/navtop.gif)
  [![currentissue](/_resources/navimages/currentissueon.gif)](/index.php)   [![about](/_resources/navimages/aboutoff.gif)](/mission.php)   [![archive](/_resources/navimages/archiveoff.gif)](/archive.php)   [![subscriptions](/_resources/navimages/subscriptionsoff.gif)](/subscribe.php)   [![contact](/_resources/navimages/contactoff.gif)](/contact.php)
  ![image](/_resources/navimages/navbottom.gif)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------

Issue \#32, Spring 2014

The Inequality Puzzle
=====================

Thomas Piketty’s tour de force analysis doesn’t get everything right, but it’s certainly gotten us pondering the right questions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lawrence H. Summers

**[Capital in the Twenty-First
Century](http://www.powells.com/biblio/62-9780674430006-0) by Thomas
Piketty; Translated by Arthur Goldhammer • Belknap/Harvard University
Press • 2014 • 696 pages • $39.95**\

Once in a great while, a heavy academic tome dominates for a time the
policy debate and, despite bristling with footnotes, shows up on the
best-seller list. Thomas Piketty’s *Capital in the Twenty-First Century*
is such a volume. As with Paul Kennedy’s *The Rise and Fall of the Great
Powers*, which came out at the end of the Reagan Administration and hit
a nerve by arguing the case against imperial overreach through an
extensive examination of European history, Piketty’s treatment of
inequality is perfectly matched to its moment.

Like Kennedy a generation ago, Piketty has emerged as a rock star of the
policy-intellectual world. His book was for a time Amazon’s bestseller.
Every pundit has expressed a view on his argument, almost always wildly
favorable if the pundit is progressive and harshly critical if the
pundit is conservative. Piketty’s tome seems to be drawn on a dozen
times for every time it is read.

This should not be surprising. At a moment when our politics seem to be
defined by a surly middle class and the President has made inequality
his central economic issue, how could a book documenting the pervasive
and increasing concentration of wealth and income among the top 1, .1,
and .01 percent of households *not* attract great attention? Especially
when it exudes erudition from each of its nearly 700 pages, drips with
literary references, and goes on to propose easily understood laws of
capitalism that suggest that the trend toward greater concentration is
inherent in the market system and will persist absent the adoption of
radical new tax policies.

Piketty’s timing may be impeccable, and his easily understandable but
slightly exotic accent perfectly suited to today’s media; but make no
mistake, his work richly deserves all the attention it is receiving.
This is not to say, however, that all of its conclusions will stand up
to scholarly criticism from his fellow economists in the short run or to
the test of history in the long run. Nor is it to suggest that his
policy recommendations are either realistic or close to complete as a
menu for addressing inequality.

Start with its strengths. In many respects, *Capital in the Twenty-First
Century* embodies the virtues that we all would like to see but find too
infrequently in the work of academic economists. It is deeply grounded
in painstaking empirical research. Piketty, in collaboration with
others, has spent more than a decade mining huge quantities of data
spanning centuries and many countries to document, absolutely
conclusively, that the share of income and wealth going to those at the
very top—the top 1 percent, .1 percent, and .01 percent of the
population—has risen sharply over the last generation, marking a return
to a pattern that prevailed before World War I. There can now be no
doubt that the phenomenon of inequality is not dominantly about the
inadequacy of the skills of lagging workers. Even in terms of income
ratios, the gaps that have opened up between, say, the top .1 percent
and the remainder of the top 10 percent are far larger than those that
have opened up between the top 10 percent and average income earners.
Even if none of Piketty’s theories stands up, the establishment of this
fact has transformed political discourse and is a Nobel Prize-worthy
contribution.

Piketty provides an elegant framework for making sense of a complex
reality. His theorizing is bold and simple and hugely important if
correct. In every area of thought, progress comes from simple abstract
paradigms that guide later thinking, such as Darwin’s idea of evolution,
Ricardo’s notion of comparative advantage, or Keynes’s conception of
aggregate demand. Whether or not his idea ultimately proves out, Piketty
makes a major contribution by putting forth a theory of natural economic
evolution under capitalism. His argument is that capital or wealth grows
at the rate of return to capital, a rate that normally exceeds the
economic growth rate. Thus, economies will tend to have ever-increasing
ratios of wealth to income, barring huge disturbances like wars and
depressions. Since wealth is highly concentrated, it follows that
inequality will tend to increase without bound until a policy change is
introduced or some kind of catastrophe interferes with wealth
accumulation.

Piketty writes in the epic philosophical mode of Keynes, Marx, or Adam
Smith rather than in the dry, technocratic prose of most contemporary
academic economists. His pages are littered with asides referencing Jane
Austen, the works of Balzac, and many other literary figures. For those
who don’t like or trust economics and economists, Piketty’s humane and
urbane learning makes his analysis that much more compelling. As well it
should: The issues of fairness of market outcomes that he deals with are
best thought of as part of a broad contemplation of our society rather
than in narrow numerical terms.

All of this is more than enough to justify the rapturous reception
accorded Piketty in many quarters. But recall that Kennedy seemed to hit
the zeitgeist perfectly but turned out later to have missed his mark as
the Berlin Wall fell and the United States enjoyed an economic
renaissance in the decade after he wrote; similarly, I have serious
reservations about Piketty’s theorizing as a guide to understanding the
evolution of American inequality. And, as even Piketty himself
recognizes, his policy recommendations are unworldly—which could stand
in the way of more feasible steps that could make a material difference
for the middle class.

Piketty’s argument is straightforward, relying, as he says in his
conclusion, on a simple inequality: r\>g, in which the rate of return on
capital exceeds the growth rate. Its essence is most easily grasped by
thinking about population growth. Think first of a world where couples
have four children. In that case, an accumulated fortune will dissipate,
as the third generation of descendants has 64 members and the fourth has
256 members. On the other hand, if couples have only two children, a
fortune has to be split only 16 ways even after four generations. So
slow growth is especially conducive to rising levels of wealth
inequality, as is a high rate of return on capital that accelerates
wealth accumulation. Piketty argues that as long as the return to wealth
exceeds an economy’s growth rate, wealth-to-income ratios will tend to
rise, leading to increased inequality. According to Piketty, this is the
normal state of capitalism. The middle of the twentieth century, a
period of unprecedented equality, was also marked by wrenching changes
associated with the Great Depression, World War II, and the rise of
government, making the period from 1914 to 1970 highly atypical.

This rather fatalistic and certainly dismal view of capitalism can be
challenged on two levels. It presumes, first, that the return to capital
diminishes slowly, if at all, as wealth is accumulated and, second, that
the returns to wealth are all reinvested. Whatever may have been the
case historically, neither of these premises is likely correct as a
guide to thinking about the American economy today.

Economists universally believe in the law of diminishing returns. As
capital accumulates, the incremental return on an additional unit of
capital declines. The crucial question goes to what is technically
referred to as the elasticity of substitution. With 1 percent more
capital and the same amount of everything else, does the return to a
unit of capital relative to a unit of labor decline by more or less than
1 percent? If, as Piketty assumes, it declines by less than 1 percent,
the share of income going to capital rises. If, on the other hand, it
declines by more than 1 percent, the share of capital falls.

Economists have tried forever to estimate elasticities of substitution
with many types of data, but there are many statistical problems.
Piketty argues that the economic literature supports his assumption that
returns diminish slowly (in technical parlance, that the elasticity of
substitution is greater than 1), and so capital’s share rises with
capital accumulation. But I think he misreads the literature by
conflating gross and net returns to capital. It is plausible that as the
capital stock grows, the increment of output produced declines slowly,
but there can be no question that depreciation increases proportionally.
And it is the return net of depreciation that is relevant for capital
accumulation. I know of no study suggesting that measuring output in net
terms, the elasticity of substitution is greater than 1, and I know of
quite a few suggesting the contrary.

There are other fragmentary bits of evidence supporting this conclusion
that come from looking at particular types of capital. Consider the case
of land. In countries where land is scarce, like Japan or the United
Kingdom, land rents represent a larger share of income than in countries
like the United States or Canada, where it is abundant. Or consider the
case of housing. Economists are quite confident that the demand for
housing is inelastic, so that as more housing is created, prices fall
more than proportionally—a proposition painfully illustrated in 2007 and
2008.

Does not the rising share of profits in national income in most
industrial countries over the last several decades prove out Piketty’s
argument? Only if one assumes that the only factors at work are the ones
he emphasizes. Rather than attributing the rising share of profits to
the inexorable process of wealth accumulation, most economists would
attribute both it and rising inequality to the working out of various
forces associated with globalization and technological change. For
example, mechanization of what was previously manual work quite
obviously will raise the share of income that comes in the form of
profits. So does the greater ability to draw on low-cost foreign labor.

There is also the question of whether the returns to wealth are largely
reinvested. A central claim by Piketty is that a country’s wealth-income
ratio tends toward s/g, the ratio of its savings rate to its growth
rate. Hence, as he argues, a declining growth rate leads to a higher
wealth ratio. But this presumes a constant or rising saving ratio. Since
he imagines returns to capital as largely reinvested, he finds this a
plausible assumption.

I am much less sure. At the simplest level, consider a family with
current income of 100 and wealth of 100 as opposed to a family with
current income of 100 and wealth of 500. One would expect the former
family to have a considerably higher saving ratio. In other words, there
is a self-correcting tendency Piketty abstracts from whereby rising
wealth leads to declining saving.

The largest single component of capital in the United States is
owner-occupied housing. Its return comes in the form of the services
enjoyed by the owners—what economists call “imputed rent”—which are all
consumed rather than reinvested since they do not take a financial form.
The phenomenon is broader. The determinants of levels of consumer
spending have been much studied by macroeconomists. The general
conclusion of the research is that an increase of $1 in wealth leads to
an additional $.05 in spending. This is just enough to offset the
accumulation of returns that is central to Piketty’s analysis.

A brief look at the *Forbes* 400 list also provides only limited support
for Piketty’s ideas that fortunes are patiently accumulated through
reinvestment. When *Forbes* compared its list of the wealthiest
Americans in 1982 and 2012, it found that less than one tenth of the
1982 list was still on the list in 2012, despite the fact that a
significant majority of members of the 1982 list would have qualified
for the 2012 list if they had accumulated wealth at a real rate of even
4 percent a year. They did not, given pressures to spend, donate, or
misinvest their wealth. In a similar vein, the data also indicate,
contra Piketty, that the share of the *Forbes* 400 who inherited their
wealth is in sharp decline.

But if it is not at all clear that there is any kind of iron law of
capitalism that leads to rising wealth and income inequality, the
question of how to account for rising inequality remains. After Piketty
and his colleagues’ work, there can never again be a question about the
phenomenon or its pervasiveness. The share of the top 1 percent of
American income recipients has risen from below 10 percent to above 20
percent in some recent years. More than half of the income gains enjoyed
by Americans in the twenty-first century have gone to the top 1 percent.
The only groups that have outpaced the top 1 percent have been the top
.1 and .01 percent.

Piketty, being a meticulous scholar, recognizes that at this point the
gains in income of the top 1 percent substantially represent labor
rather than capital income, so they are really a separate issue from
processes of wealth accumulation. The official data probably
underestimate this aspect—for example, some large part of Bill Gates’s
reported capital income is really best thought of as a return to his
entrepreneurial labor.

So why has the labor income of the top 1 percent risen so sharply
relative to the income of everyone else? No one really knows. Certainly
there have been changes in prevailing mores regarding executive
compensation, particularly in the English-speaking world. It is
conceivable, as Piketty argues, that as tax rates have fallen,
executives have gone to more trouble to bargain for super high salaries,
effort that would not have been worthwhile when tax rates were high
(though I think it is equally plausible that higher tax rates would
pressure executives to extract more, so as to maintain their post-tax
income levels).

There is plenty to criticize in existing corporate-governance
arrangements and their lack of resistance to executive self-dealing.
There are certainly abuses. I think, however, that those like Piketty
who dismiss the idea that productivity has anything to do with
compensation should be given a little pause by the choices made in firms
where a single hard-nosed owner is in control. The executives who make
the most money are not for most part the ones running public companies
who can pack their boards with friends. Rather, they are the executives
chosen by private equity firms to run the companies they control. This
is not in any way to ethically justify inordinate compensation—only to
raise a question about the economic forces that generate it.

The rise of incomes of the top 1 percent also reflects the extraordinary
levels of compensation in the financial sector. While anyone looking at
the substantial resources invested in trading faster by nanoseconds has
to worry about the over-financialization of the economy, much of the
income earned in finance does reflect some form of pay for performance;
investment managers are, for example, compensated with a share of the
returns they generate.

And there is the basic truth that technology and globalization give
greater scope to those with extraordinary entrepreneurial ability, luck,
or managerial skill. Think about the contrast between George Eastman,
who pioneered fundamental innovations in photography, and Steve Jobs.
Jobs had an immediate global market, and the immediate capacity to
implement his innovations at very low cost, so he was able to capture a
far larger share of their value than Eastman. Correspondingly, while
Eastman’s innovations and their dissemination through the Eastman Kodak
Co. provided a foundation for a prosperous middle class in Rochester for
generations, no comparable impact has been created by Jobs’s
innovations.

This type of scenario is pervasive. Most obviously, the best athletes
and entertainers benefit from a worldwide market for their celebrity.
But something similar is true for those with extraordinary gifts of any
kind. For example, I suspect we will soon see the rise of educator
superstars who command audiences of hundreds of thousands for their
Internet courses and earn sums way above the traditional dreams of
academics.

Even where capital accumulation is concerned, I am not sure that
Piketty’s theory emphasizes the right aspects. Looking to the future, my
guess is that the main story connecting capital accumulation and
inequality will not be Piketty’s tale of amassing fortunes. It will be
the devastating consequences of robots, 3-D printing, artificial
intelligence, and the like for those who perform routine tasks. Already
there are more American men on disability insurance than doing
production work in manufacturing. And the trends are all in the wrong
direction, particularly for the less skilled, as the capacity of capital
embodying artificial intelligence to replace white-collar as well as
blue-collar work will increase rapidly in the years ahead.

Where does this leave policy?

Piketty’s argument is that a tendency toward wealth accumulation and
concentration is an inevitable byproduct of the workings of the
capitalist system. From his perspective, differences between capitalism
as practiced in the English-speaking world and in continental Europe are
of second order relative to the underlying forces at work. So he is led
to far-reaching policy proposals as the principal redress for rising
inequality.

In particular, Piketty argues for an internationally enforced
progressive wealth tax, where the rate of tax rises with the level of
wealth. This idea has many problems, starting with the fact that it is
unimaginable that it will be implemented any time soon. Even with
political will, there are many problems of enforcement. How does one
value a closely held business? Even if a closely held business could be
accurately valued, will its owners be able to generate the liquidity
necessary to pay the tax? Won’t each jurisdiction have a tendency to
undervalue assets within it as a way of attracting investment? Will a
wealth tax encourage unseemly consumption by the wealthy?

Perhaps the best way of thinking about Piketty’s wealth tax is less as a
serious proposal than as a device for pointing up two truths. First,
success in combating inequality will require addressing the myriad
devices that enable those with great wealth to avoid paying income and
estate taxes. It is sobering to contemplate that in the United States,
annual estate and gift tax revenues come to less than 1 percent of the
wealth of just the 400 wealthiest Americans. With respect to taxation,
as so much else in life, the real scandal is not the illegal things
people do—it is the things that are legal. And second, such efforts are
likely to require international cooperation if they are to be effective
in a world where capital is ever more mobile. The G-20 nations working
through the OECD have begun to address these issues, but there is much
more that can be done. Whatever one’s views on capital mobility
generally, there should be a consensus on much more vigorous cooperative
efforts to go after its dark side—tax havens, bank secrecy, money
laundering, and regulatory arbitrage.

Beyond taxation, however, there is, one would hope, more than Piketty
acknowledges that can be done to make it easier to raise middle-class
incomes and to make it more difficult to accumulate great fortunes
without requiring great social contributions in return. Examples include
more vigorous enforcement of antimonopoly laws, reductions in excessive
protection for intellectual property in cases where incentive effects
are small and monopoly rents are high, greater encouragement of
profit-sharing schemes that benefit workers and give them a stake in
wealth accumulation, increased investment of government pension
resources in riskier high-return assets, strengthening of collective
bargaining arrangements, and improvements in corporate governance.
Probably the two most important steps that public policy can take with
respect to wealth inequality are the strengthening of financial
regulation to more fully eliminate implicit and explicit subsidies to
financial activity, and an easing of land-use restrictions that cause
the real estate of the rich in major metropolitan areas to keep rising
in value.

Hanging over this subject is a last issue. Why is inequality so great a
concern? Is it because of the adverse consequences of great fortunes or
because of the hope that middle-class incomes could grow again? If, as I
believe, envy is a much less important reason for concern than lost
opportunity, great emphasis should shift to policies that promote
bottom-up growth. At a moment when secular stagnation is a real risk,
such policies may include substantially increased public investment and
better training for young people and retraining for displaced workers,
as well as measures to reduce barriers to private investment in spheres
like energy production, where substantial job creation is possible.

Look at Kennedy airport. It is an embarrassment as an entry point to the
leading city in the leading country in the world. The wealthiest, by
flying privately, largely escape its depredations. Fixing it would
employ substantial numbers of people who work with their hands and
provide a significant stimulus to employment and growth. As I’ve written
previously, if a moment when the United States can borrow at lower than
3 percent in a currency we print ourselves, and when the unemployment
rate for construction workers hovers above 10 percent, is not the right
moment to do it, when will that moment come?

Books that represent the last word on a topic are important. Books that
represent one of the first words are even more important. By focusing
attention on what has happened to a fortunate few among us, and by
opening up for debate issues around the long-run functioning of our
market system, *Capital in the Twenty-First Century* has made a
profoundly important
contribution.![image](http://dajoi.org/_resources/images/endslug.gif)

TAGS:
[Inequality](/search_tags.php?IncludeBlogs=1&limit=20&tag=Inequality)

Issue \#32, Spring 2014

![image](/_resources/images/title_comments.gif)

[Post a Comment](#postcomment)

\

Frances Stewart:

There is also the issue of demand. As capital share increases and is
saved, growth in consumption falls behind growth in output. Why should
investment be sustained sufficiently to keep pace with savings in that
situation? Consumer debt can help but cannot expand indefinitely without
leading to a crisis.

May 14, 2014, 12:27 PM

Steve Roth/Asymptosis:

"It is plausible that as the capital stock grows, the increment of
output produced declines slowly, but there can be no question that
depreciation increases proportionally."

This seems to presume that 1. financial assets "depreciate" (which they
don't, and they can't be consumed like real capital) or 2. That the
stock of financial assets has a one-to-one correspondence with the stock
of real capital.

The stock of financial assets is a function of:

\1. Government deficit spending.

\2. Net bank lending (chartered by government).

\3. The extent to which real assets (not just fixed -- human,
organization, natural, etc.) have been financialized/indebted.

\4. Animal spirits: the market's perception of the value of financial
assets relative to the funancialized *and* unfinancialized real assets
that they are claims upon.

Piketty defines "capital" as synonymous with wealth. Should have called
it Wealth in the 21st Century, but that's not so catchy. Summers falls
into the same conceptual quagmire.

As a study of wealth, Piketty is utterly brilliant. As a study of
"capital," not so much.

May 14, 2014, 12:38 PM

Eric E:

An excellent review,not least in emphasizing plausible and possible
policy reforms.

Still, it's fun to see the "Piketty Panic" (Krugman) in action!

May 14, 2014, 12:44 PM

Conscience of the society :

Alfred N.Whitefield wrote; \
 ' experiment is nothing else than a mode of cooking the facts for the
sake of exemplifying the law'. What Piketty undertaken was exemplifying
an already known old fact, now supported with huge data of evidence. The
final solution advised by him is sensible governmental action. How could
modern democracies that depend exclusively on capitalists for country
'development', undertake actions to tame the very capital ? Final
olution of the problem is reinventing modern democratic order that now
partner capital. More than inequality of income, what should be
addressed is the ending of the inequality of social relevance and
individual dignity ! Income is only a means that leads to social
relevance and individual dignity of citizens. Please read our reply to
Piketty on these lines, for understanding modern problem of inequality
in a new light, at link:
[http://whatequalityshouldmeanindemocracy.blogspot.in/2014/05/the-root-element-of-equality-as-model.html](http://whatequalityshouldmeanindemocracy.blogspot.in/2014/05/the-root-element-of-equality-as-model.html)

May 14, 2014, 12:51 PM

Nic Rosato:

Re: The displacement of labor due to technological advances. Should we
be addressing population growth? What would the effects of a smaller
population be on a market-based economy?

May 14, 2014, 12:54 PM

Sandwichman:

Inequality has "microfoundations."

[http://econospeak.blogspot.com/2014/05/microfoundations-of-inequality-and.html](http://econospeak.blogspot.com/2014/05/microfoundations-of-inequality-and.html)

May 14, 2014, 12:57 PM

Patrick Hickey:

This essay numbed my mind to the point I had to admit that Summers
actually had little of significance to say.

As a "big picture" thinker, I'm looking for changes that sweep me off my
feet!

The change is already infiltrating our economy, and nobody is really
focusing on the significance of the displacement of human workers with
robotics.

First of all, how can the economy sustain itself if all the productivity
belongs to robot workers who must be "owned" by some elitists or other.

Very few productive human beings will be required for production, so
very few human beings will have the resources necessary for consumption
of goods and services.

If redistribution of the wealth doesn't occur, how will this challenge
be dealt with?

Of course, somehow we all could concentrate on realizing our human
potential, such as envisioned by the 20th century
psychologist/philosophers Abraham Maslow, Carl Rogers, and others. All
life could be a stage, or we could paint, create gardens, sing and
dance.

I suppose today's anal-retentive economists would rather see the planet
destroyed through violence and exploitation.

Personally, I couldn't care less about what Summers thinks about it, or
even Piketty, because I'm glad I've already left their world of
capitalistic fixation behind!

May 14, 2014, 1:29 PM

Sandwichman:

I'm not sure how "comprehensive" Lawrence Summers's take on Piketty's
arguments is. Inequality has "microfoundations" to use the "dry
technocratic prose of most contemporary academic economists." And those
microfoundations have been both concealed by the technocratic prose and
reinforced by the resulting policy advice of academic economists,
prominently including Dr. Summers.

Nearly a century ago, Thorstein Veblen offered insights into one
important mechanism underlying the concentration of wealth that he
termed "industrial sabotage" or the "conscientious withdrawal of
efficiency" by business. The basic idea is that the pursuit of maximum
pecuniary gain is not the same thing as maximizing output of product.
Veblen's intuition is compatible with the neoclassical analysis of
imperfect competition, but, as Warren Samuels noted twenty years ago,
the dry technocratic academic economists who developed theories about
efficiency wages and equilibrium unemployment didn't seem to care that
the "shirking" they contemplated was entirely one-sided. Lawrence
Summers was among those self-styled "New Keynesians."

There is much, much more to say about these "microfoundations." I have
explored them in a series of blog posts at EconoSpeak titled
"Microfoundations of Inequality and Sabotage."\

[http://econospeak.blogspot.com/2014/05/microfoundations-of-inequality-and.html](http://econospeak.blogspot.com/2014/05/microfoundations-of-inequality-and.html)

May 14, 2014, 1:33 PM

Xin:

Regarding superstar educators, Larry should turn himself into the first
data point, if not to be richer, then just to prove his point.

May 14, 2014, 1:34 PM

Charles A:

Summers says he is for "the strengthening of financial regulation to
more fully eliminate implicit and explicit subsidies to financial
activity."

This from the man who slandered a regulator proposing to do something
about derivatives. He said she "cast the shadow of regulatory
uncertainty over an otherwise thriving market - raising risks for the
stability and competitiveness of American derivative trading."

A Marxist review of Piketty's book is at\

[http://mltoday.com/professor-piketty-fights-orthodoxy-and-attacks-inequality](http://mltoday.com/professor-piketty-fights-orthodoxy-and-attacks-inequality)\

May 14, 2014, 2:28 PM

Mr. Econotarian:

Global income inequality, enhanced by entrenched communism in China and
planned democratic economies in India, is now going down. Our concerns
about inequality in the West is going to be a small part of the global
picture.

By the way, Delta just spent $1.4 billion to redo JFK Terminal 4, and it
is wonderful!

May 14, 2014, 2:36 PM

Adams:

Paul Kennedy did not forecast the imminent decline of the USA. His
analysis was historical and long-term, and is even more relevant to the
military adventurism and overreach of foreign policy of the USA now than
it was then. In the next chapter China eats our lunch, unless they
ignore Piketty and allow wealth to concentrate at the top as we are
almost certain to continue doing.

May 14, 2014, 2:51 PM

Daniel G:

Doesn't Picketty's theory completely fit the argument that executives do
earn their high salaries? The returns on capital accumulated by
corporations are the basis for the high executive salaries. I thought
that was his whole point regarding managers.

May 14, 2014, 3:41 PM

The Hat of the Three-Toed Man-Baby:

Steve Roth seems quite dumb.

May 14, 2014, 4:11 PM

iBlorch:

I detect a preoccupation with personal wealth in this analysis of
inequality. Chock it up to envy but nobody seems to get their panties in
a wad fretting over the obscene wealth accumulating in the balance
sheets of global corporations like Apple or Exxon. Likewise for
endowment funds like Harvard School. Where is the hand wringing over
CALPERS 291 billion in assets.

It seems to me any concentration of wealth, whether it be to an
individual or some other entity presents society with the same set of
problems. Again, the preoccupation with wealthy individuals as a product
of envy is a distraction from larger issue: Obscene concentrations of
wealth anywhere is a threat to society everywhere.

May 14, 2014, 5:09 PM

Bob Higgins:

Summers declares that "our politics seem to be defined by a surly middle
class," while no such thing is true, as I'm sure he's aware. Our
politics are defined by a voracious and criminal class of capitalists
for whom no amount of power and wealth will ever be sufficient. He
offers his mercilessly long winded and largely opaque screed, scattered
with tidbits of the arcane jargon of economic alchemy with which I admit
I'm not familiar. But in the end he misses the main point which is
unalterably simple.

The plutocrats, with his assistance, have stolen our money, our labor,
and our government. We will reclaim all three. Whether this is done
through negotiation, regulation and taxation or in the French style is
open to question.\
 Yes, the working classes, the "piss boys" are somewhat restive and
though we may not be schooled in abstractions like s/g or r\>g, many of
us do understand BS. We don't have to read it, we can sniff it out at a
distance.

May 14, 2014, 5:47 PM

ezra abrams:

how can someone as smart as LS say something as silly as most wealth
coming from work ?\
 S Jobs, B Gates, M Zuckerberg, not to mention Hedge fund guys \
 did\
 NOT\
 get their money from work; their money came from some wierd roulette
like system coupled with rules that the wealthy have forced on the rest
of us (eg, why on earth are cap gains taxed lower then ordinary income ?
just crazy)

May 14, 2014, 9:13 PM

Sandwichman:

"...some wierd roulette like system coupled with rules..."

It's called "intellectual property," which is secret code for a MONOPOLY
granted by the state. Of course, these monopolies encourage innovation
(of course they do.) We know it is so because the monopolists tell us it
is so.

May 14, 2014, 9:32 PM

Corbin:

Sometimes, the best insight comes from reading your own words - it's
like tea leaves, honestly. So, author, try... 'much of the income earned
in finance does reflect some form of pay for performance; investment
managers are, for example, compensated with a share of the returns they
generate' (ha! ha!), and also 'Look at Kennedy airport. It is an
embarrassment as an entry point to the leading city in the leading
country in the world. The wealthiest, by flying privately, largely
escape its depredations... If... (now) is not the right moment to
(renovate and invest), when will that moment come?' (double ha! ha!)
You've got your own answers in there, don't you know!

May 14, 2014, 10:34 PM

danberg:

No one as far as I know has as yet looked at China through the "Piketty
lens;"

May 15, 2014, 2:06 AM

Dexter Bland:

And why not a wealth tax? Societies get rich from the exchange of goods
and services. Hoarding of assets is detrimental to the economy. So why
do we tax those who earn and consume, and not those who hoard assets and
use these to accumulate more assets?

Neither do we need wealthy individuals to finance new ventures.
Kickstarter and others show how this can be done in a far more
democratic way.

Summers is right, Picketty is just a starting point. But also a good
opportunity to do something a little more radical than just the
tinkering suggested above.

May 15, 2014, 3:30 AM

Guenter:

Thank you for neatly summing up Piketty's book. I found it unbearably
tedious to read and gave up, according to my kindle, after about 10%. I
do agree that the subject, as well as Piketty's research, is highly
important.

May 15, 2014, 7:15 AM

PerryM:

Inequality is when you have something I want.

Next hard question........

May 15, 2014, 8:12 AM

Emelks:

The assumption that the average American is consumed with rage at those
"evil" 1%ers is the fatal flaw in the entire structure. My family is
firmly in the middle middle class and not one of us could care less how
much someone else's bank account holds. The complaints of those who
obsess over such matters strikes us as envy and an attempt to gain power
over others.

We do care, and quite a lot, when self-serving bureaucrats, politicians
and "activists" attempt to tell us they know how much money *our* bank
account should contain and how we must use that money. We see quite
clearly how the demand that a bureaucrat control the mysterious 1% will
one day end in that same bureaucrat controlling the remainder with the
same "logic."

Mr Summers and Mr Piketty and those who follow both have a steep climb
ahead of them to convince us that they know best how everyone should
manage their financial lives. We trust Steve Jobs over Piketty any day
of the week, and ourselves over Steve Jobs every hour of the day.

May 15, 2014, 9:35 AM

Nick van der Burg:

@PerryM Not if you can offer me something in return that I want.

Inequality is that I have hardly anything to offer that you want, while
you have a lot to offer that I want.

It's not the same as 'envy', as conservatives think.

May 15, 2014, 9:37 AM

Michael McDonald:

Professor Summers has written a brilliant review of Piketty's book, the
best by far I have seen.

May 15, 2014, 9:40 AM

Frank Shifreen:

I start with the the quote from the article- about the Forbes list "When
Forbes compared its list of the wealthiest Americans in 1982 and 2012,
it found that less than one tenth of the 1982 list was still on the list
in 2012, despite the fact that a significant majority of members of the
1982 list would have qualified for the 2012 list if they had accumulated
wealth at a real rate of even 4 percent a year\
 Any cursory examination of the Forbes list- and I have- can show that
much of the wealth is now hidden. In 1982 there was less of an incentive
to hide investments. Much of the wealth is percolated through trusts,
hidden investments and dodges that were not needed in 1982. Check the
list and see. I think Piketty would be validated.

May 15, 2014, 9:58 AM

Patrick:

Larry Summers got it all wrong in the 2008 financial debacle. Why do we
keep consulting him when his judgment has been so poor, with devastating
effect. It isn't enough to be very smart - let's find some other smart
person to do reviews that also made the right call in 2008.

May 15, 2014, 10:12 AM

Mittymo:

"The question of how to account for rising inequality remains." Really?

People that get good educations, work hard, abstain from drugs, stay out
of trouble with the law, & regularly save & invest part of their
earnings constantly widen the gap between themselves and persons that
don't do those things.

To me the answer is fairly obvious.

May 15, 2014, 10:18 AM

Anthony:

The above critique, though positing thoughtful counter points to
Piketty's theme, at bottom subtly justifies/rationalizes inequality
outcomes inherent (r\>g) to capitalism per se but function of other
factors/trends correlative to capitalist dynamic.

May 15, 2014, 10:26 AM

Nathan Shewmaker:

Steve Roth makes the excellent point that Piketty's "capital" is wealth,
not the capital found in the production functions. Eventually, though,
if returns on wealth are based on fundamentals (which it seems like they
should be over the long run), then the two returns should converge.
Also, it seems puzzling that levels of capital vs income and capital's
share of income have both risen in recent years, yet no study can find
the right coefficient in the model that would produce this result. Maybe
there's a problem with the studies.

May 15, 2014, 10:51 AM

Matthew Lykken:

In a capitalist system earnings flow to capital save to the extent that
labor has the power to demand a share. While we may have been able to
absorb the decline in labor market power from automation, globalization
both undercut market power and destroyed the ability to bolster labor by
minimum wage laws or labor unions, since jobs could be exported (while
local service jobs are undercut by badly controlled immigration, as can
be demonstrated by charting the differential between incomes of sub-high
school employees (immigrant heavy) and some-college employees (heavily
native) against immigrant rates for the 50 states. We need to respond
withpolicy that attracts high-value jobs to America and gives market
power to workers. this can be done in part by the Shared Economic Growth
proposal. See
[http://sharedgrowth.blogspot.com/?view=magazine](http://sharedgrowth.blogspot.com/?view=magazine)
and
[http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/03/opinion/end-corporate-taxation.html?\_r=1](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/03/opinion/end-corporate-taxation.html?_r=1)
and
[https://www.law.columbia.edu/null/download?&exclusive=filemgr.download&file\_id=55888](https://www.law.columbia.edu/null/download?&exclusive=filemgr.download&file_id=55888)

May 15, 2014, 11:45 AM

Dave Thomas:

How much inequality does the marriage rate, level of education, marital
status at time of childbirth, age at time of childbirth, and number of
parents residing at home.

How does a tax of any kind provide the stability of a marriage, improve
the level of individual education, end teenage pregnancy, end single
parent homes, or end out of wedlock births?

In other words how does a tax tackle the major causes of inequality?

May 15, 2014, 11:48 AM

DRMustang:

Larry Summers, Alan Greenspan, Robert Rubin - all largely responsible
for the recent financial collapse while at the same time attaining
riches beyond anyone's wildest dreams. Listening to any of them is a
mistake for the 99.9% and their opinions are beneficial only for the
0.1%. Rather try Piketty's lessons than continue the insanity of
engaging in the same policies proposed by the same same people that
created the financial collapse and expect a different result.

May 15, 2014, 1:02 PM

Michael Thaddeus:

Of all the injustices, of all the failings in our current economic order
that could be righteously denounced, Summers singles out, in his
conclusion, the shabby condition of Kennedy Airport. That speaks volumes
about the man and his values.

May 15, 2014, 1:14 PM

Arthur Martin:

When capitalism works as intended, money makes money (there is overall
profit, growth, accumulation). And when (as has always been the case) a
relatively small minority of the population controls most of the money,
then those people make most of the money that money makes. In other
words, when capitalism works, wealth (and the power that comes with
wealth) concentrates in the hands of a relative few. Thus, capitalism
appears to be inherently plutocratic.

May 15, 2014, 4:20 PM

Arthur Martin:

@Dave Thomas: the problem is plutocracy -- a social system (government,
economy, public sphere, social structures) organized and run by and for
the wealthy, and specifically the money makes money logic of capital
accumulation that is the fundamental value of capitalism. Your
implication that if the poor would just act more like upper middle class
people, plutocracy (which is the source of the degree of inequality we
suffer) would disappear is economically ridiculous and morally flawed.
The problem is not the poor people with the least power; it's the
self-righteousness, greed, and anti-social attitudes of those with the
most power.

And contrary to the delusions of self-righteous plutocrats like Mitt
Romney and commenters like "emelks" above, the issue for most of us has
nothing to do with "envy," it's an issue of politics and morality: do
Americans want to live in a plutocracy or a democracy? That is the basic
moral issue of our time that the plutocrats are desperate to obscure
because they (at least the smart ones) know they can't win a fair debate
based on honest dealing and clear thinking.

May 15, 2014, 5:27 PM

Arthur Martin:

@Dave Thomas: the problem is not poor people, it's plutocracy -- a
social system (government, economy, public sphere, social structures)
organized and run by and for the wealthy, and specifically the money
makes money logic of capital accumulation that is the fundamental value
of capitalism. Your implication that if the poor would just act more
like upper middle class people, plutocracy (which is the source of the
degree of inequality we suffer) would disappear is economically
ridiculous and morally flawed. The problem is not the poor people with
the least power; it's the self-righteousness, greed, and anti-social
attitudes of those with the most power.

And contrary to the delusions of self-righteous plutocrats like Mitt
Romney and commenters like "emelks" above, the issue for most of us has
nothing to do with "envy," it's an issue of politics and morality: do
Americans want to live in a plutocracy or a democracy? That is the basic
moral issue of our time that the plutocrats are desperate to obscure
because they (at least the smart ones) know they can't win a fair debate
based on honest dealing and clear thinking.

May 15, 2014, 5:30 PM

Michael Pintar:

Great review and he brings up the most important point that others, such
as Martin Wolf, have also alluded to. It is why should we care about
inequality? I think it is actually the most important issue economically
not just socially. There is clearly lack of demand in not just the US
economy but also in the global economy. This is despite and perhaps
because of record profit margins and zero interest rates in a very large
part of the developed world. These facts should point to an ever
increasing share of the economy going to a smaller and smaller subset of
the population. And this subset's propensity to consume is much, much
less than the majority.

I am actually surprised that Summers and Wolf would bring up this
question as if they did not know that this has been a recurring problem
throughout history. Following every boom leading to a rise in inequality
is a bust due to lack of demand. The prototypical example being the 20's
leading to the 30's.

May 15, 2014, 7:48 PM

y81:

But surely, when it comes to Kennedy airport, the people have spoken.
However grotty the airport, it's a lot nicer than the airplane you get
onto once you're there. And yet, airlines make more money with ever
smaller and tighter seats, sold at lower prices. Luxury, or even
middle-class, travel is simply not a good that any significant number of
people are interested in buying. That being so, there is no good reason
to tax them to supply something they don't want, especially since middle
class taxes are already a lot higher than they were 50 years ago.

May 15, 2014, 9:00 PM

Ted Schrey Montreal:

"...why has the labor income of the top 1 percent risen so sharply...?
No one really knows."

Come now, no one? The top 1 percent surely does? I am quite sure people
who earn a hundred million buckeroos didn't just walk around outside, on
a windy day, and got hit by a whopping bundle of cash?

No,no; it's the usual disingenuousness of economists--which appears to
be part of the job. No one really knows.

Yes, my foot. There are people on this planet who operate within arm's
reach of the trough and as a matter of routine they dip into it.

Everyone really knows.

May 15, 2014, 10:12 PM

Arthur Martin:

It seems pretty obvious that money managers are the highest paid
profession because their work -- making the money of the wealthy make
more money (thereby concentrating the wealth of the wealthy) -- is the
most highly-valued role in society in the opinion of the people who get
to decide -- the people with the money!

The fact that money manager/ investment banker types are the highest
paid is exactly what one would expect in a plutocracy. Which is what we,
as a capitalism-based society, are.

[Apologies for the double post above. A difficult captcha messed me up.]

May 16, 2014, 2:34 AM

lewis:

It's pretty clear that Mr. Summers didn't actually read past the
introduction.

May 16, 2014, 10:29 AM

Rui Sousa:

Summers analysis has one massive glaring flaw: he confuses the
INEQUALITY of capital DISTRIBUTION with the TOTAL INCREASE in capital.
We can continue to have high returns on capital even as the rich
accumulate more and more of it because, as the non-rich have less and
less of it, in aggregate the total amount of capital will increase at a
slower rate than in a system where capital was more evenly distributed.
In fact, the rich actually favor systems in which total capital
increases more slowly since, in that way, their share becomes that much
more valuable. This is why the rich (and the right; they share the same
ideology) inveigh so strongly against inflation and money printing
schemes for economic stimulus. They understand, quite rightly, that
increasing the money supply will diminish the value and return (interest
rates) that they can get on the own hordes.

So an r\>g return on capital can be sustained (barring the catastrophes
or gov interventions Summers mentions) indefinitely because it does not
have to lead to a situation (in fact trends against it) where total
capital growth \> GDP growth; it may simply lead to a situation in which
TOTAL capital grows slower than it should but is increasingly
concentrated in fewer hands and therefore becomes even more valuable and
yields a greater rate of return.\

May 16, 2014, 10:55 AM

Sandwichman:

"There are people on this planet who operate within arm's reach of the
trough and as a matter of routine they dip into it."

Bingo! That wasn't so hard.

May 16, 2014, 11:12 AM

Ralph Lynch:

Easy, just set the maximum wage lower than the minimum wage and nobody
will have to work at all.

May 16, 2014, 6:26 PM

emelks:

**@Arthur Martin**

> And contrary to the delusions of self-righteous plutocrats like Mitt
> Romney and commenters like "emelks" above, the issue for most of us
> has nothing to do with "envy," it's an issue of politics and morality:
> do Americans want to live in a plutocracy or a democracy? That is the
> basic moral issue of our time that the plutocrats are desperate to
> obscure because they (at least the smart ones) know they can't win a
> fair debate based on honest dealing and clear thinking.

I want neither of your fallacious options. I want to continue to live in
a Constitutional Representative Republic.

Speaking of "clear thinking" why don't you stop spouting platitudes and
meaningless labels like "plutocrats" and try some real numbers. Just how
much of one's earnings is one "allowed" to keep? Where will the diverted
earnings end up? More welfare? A few hundred thousand more bureaucrats?
And most importantly, who decides that I or anyone else has earned "too
much" and must be punished for that?

It seems to me that it's *your* side that hides behind meaningless tripe
and vague labels while encouraging others to get angry when a BMW drives
past. So prove me wrong. Answer my questions.

May 17, 2014, 1:09 AM

Eugene Patrick Devany:

Mr. Summers is right about "Capital" being an important start of issues
and data that needs to be considered in tax reform.\
 A true American wealth tax can be "optional". Consider a flat income
tax rate of 26% (plus gift and estate taxes) or a taxpayer choice of
paying a low 8% income tax rate (and no 7.65% payroll tax) combined with
a 2% wealth tax (excluding $500,000 retirement savings and $15,000
cash). Ninety-nine percent of taxpayers would elect to pay the 2% wealth
tax to take advantage of the 8% income tax rate and elimination of gift,
estate and capital gains taxes.

A complementary business tax reform would consist of an 8% C corporation
rate and 4% VAT.

As a bonus, the replacement of payroll taxes would also create full
employment, higher wages and a robust economy.\

May 17, 2014, 9:09 AM

Arthur Martin:

emelks (if that is your real name):

Here are answers to your questions, which, I'm sorry to say, reveal the
persecuted rich person world-view that I have no hope to penetrate, but
do hope having drawn you out and now responding will help demonstrate to
others the moral vacuity of your positions:

\(1) One is "allowed" to keep as much of one's earnings as the people in
charge of one's society decides is appropriate. For the very rich, that
is likely to be more in a plutocracy and less in a democracy. It's a
political issue, not a philosophical one. (Although some very smart
people have proposed that one is only entitled to "own" after-tax income
[i.e., pre-tax income is not even yours] because that income is
available only because of the social structures and governmental
interventions that allow you to make any income at all. That's a more
philosophical position. [See Liam Murphy and Thomas Nagel, The Myth of
Ownership: Taxes and Justice.])

\(2) If society wants to retain capital accumulation as a fundamental
value AND be a real democracy, as opposed to a plutocracy, wealth from
the top will have to be distributed down the wealth scale, presumably
through a variety of taxing and spending policies, such as is done in
the social democracies of Scandinavia. Not perfect places, but much
better economically for average and poor citizens than my country, the
USA.

\(3) Your insistence that being taxed for the overall good of society
(e.g., to lower inequality, to minimize poverty, to provide decent
universal services) is "punishment" suggests a lack of social
responsibility that no successful society can survive. You are a canary
in a coal mine alerting people paying attention to the moral collapse of
America -- and it's collapsing from the top, not the bottom.

Plutocracy is the problem; democracy is the answer -- not only for
society as a whole, but for your (emelks') angry delusions of rich guy
persecution. (Another possible answer for your self-righteous,
anti-social delusions: find a New Testament with red words and read
them.)

May 17, 2014, 2:15 PM

Clegg:

@emelks says "My family is firmly in the middle middle class and not one
of us could care less how much someone else's bank account holds."

This is the low information citizen who is eating out of Summers' hand.
What this "middle class" person doesn't realize is that, for the last 35
years, the 1% class, via supply side fiscal policy, has been
redistributing middle class wealth into their pockets at an average rate
of around 0.5% per year.

In 1976, the 99% (emelks) owned 80% of this country. Today, the 99% own
just 63%. In 10 years, at current "trickle down" trend rate, the 99%
will own just 56% of America.

The last time we saw 1% / 99% wealth ratios this out of balance
(according to Piketty's data) was 1929, which triggered the Great
Depression.

If Joe Emelks 6-pack middle America doesn't understand the socioeconomic
reality upon us, and continues to be satisfied by media sound bites and
1% talking points, then no political action will follow.

The conversation needs to find a way. Piketty seems to be opening new
debate, and that's a good thing.

May 17, 2014, 9:40 PM

Carl Legg:

@emalks "Where will the diverted earnings end up? More welfare? A few
hundred thousand more bureaucrats? And most importantly, who decides
that I or anyone else has earned "too much" and must be punished for
that?"

Emelks, I encourage you to do a comparative study of American tax rates
and fiscal policy. Compare the period 1945-1980 and the period
1980-present. Your fears are unwarranted, and frankly just parrot 1%
talking points.

Piketty shows that different periods of history had different
class-wealth ratios. For instance, in the aristocratic period, the
1%-class owned in excess of 50% of a nation's capital, which led to
widespread impoverishment and gross social inequity. Piketty shows how
the 1945-1980 period of U.S. history was perhaps the healthiest, most
vibrant socioeconomic experience in world history. Multi-millionaires
were created daily. Hugely successful businesses were built and low
unemployment was standard. Wealth flowed everywhere, and truly "trickled
down" to all socioeconomic classes. U.S. infrastructure became the envy
of the free-world. But here's the most important thing: the broad
American middle-class was HEALTHY and THRIVING. By 1976, the 99% (you)
OWNED 80% of America. Let that sink in. Economists call this the Golden
Era of American socioeconomics. Even America's poor were the richest
poor on the planet. Truman-Eisenhower fiscal policy was brilliant.

This healthy and proper distribution of wealth did NOT go to "a few
hundred thousand more bureaucrats". It did not go to "welfare", at least
not in the manner you imply with your statement. The proper
distributions of income and wealth went to the American people via
higher wages, lower taxes (for the middle), better quality jobs, higher
mobility, more realistic ratios of labor-to-management salaries, etc..
Read Piketty if you want a better understanding of how this works.

America then made a radical fiscal policy change in the 1980s. It was
called "trickle down" (little different than Harding-Coolidge tax
policies of the Roaring 20's). But, since the 1980s, American wealth has
been steadily trickling UP from the 99% to the 1%. In 1976, the 1% owned
20% of America. Today, the 1% own 38% of America, and continue to suck
0.5% of total U.S. wealth from the pockets of the 99% (that's you,
emelks) every year. At this rate, by 2025, the 1% will own 43% of
American wealth, which approaches the aristocratic wealth ratios of
pre-revolutionary France, and which matches the 1% / 99% wealth
imbalance we experienced in 1929, which triggered the Great Depression.

As 1% ownership of America has risen dramatically, 99% socioeconomic
class-wealth ratios have NOT risen proportionately. Not even close.
Study the income growth parity charts from 1945-1980 (they are in
parity). Then study what happened after 1980 (a massive disconnect of
the 1% from the 99%). What grew to be the strongest broad-based
socio-economic group in world history (1945-1980) by every metric (% of
total wealth, absolute value of wealth, spending power, capital
acquisition, income mobility, etc.), has been decimated by every metric
(% of total, abs value, income growth slope parity, purchasing power,
etc.). Since 1980, middle class income (households within 50% of median
income) has shrunk 18% relative to 1980 dollars and spending power.

[http://big.assets.huffingtonpost.com/MiddleClass\_6.png](http://big.assets.huffingtonpost.com/MiddleClass_6.png)

Today, America's middle class is no longer the envy of the world. Today,
America's poor are no longer the "richest poor" in the western world.
You can see the 35 year slide from true American exceptionalism (the
world leader at ALL socioeconomic levels), to a country whose 1% has
sucked, and continues to suck, the common wealth from the 99% --- which
has NOT "risen all boats" but in fact has decimated our country. Here's
the sad truth, in raw data, if you're interested:

[http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/23/upshot/the-american-middle-class-is-no-longer-the-worlds-richest.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/23/upshot/the-american-middle-class-is-no-longer-the-worlds-richest.html)

May 17, 2014, 10:36 PM

emelks:

To Arthur Martin

> Here are answers to your questions, which, I'm sorry to say, reveal
> the persecuted rich person world-view that I have no hope to
> penetrate, but do hope having drawn you out and now responding will
> help demonstrate to others the moral vacuity of your positions

I am far from "rich." I am hoping to remain in the middle class by the
end of 2016. Persecuted? Anyone who works for a living and sees their
earnings consumed by every imaginable tax and fee imposed from on high
is by your definition holding a "rich person world view." No, we're just
sick to death of very level of government taking our earnings from us to
fund nonsense. The "LOOK! SQUIRREL!" tactic of diverting our attention
from our own tax load to look at what someone else owns or does simply
doesn't work.

> (1) One is "allowed" to keep as much of one's earnings as the people
> in charge of one's society decides is appropriate. For the very rich,
> that is likely to be more in a plutocracy and less in a democracy.
> It's a political issue, not a philosophical one.

And here we have the crux of the issue. You insist that the fruits of
one's labor are not theirs to use they see fit--the very definition of
slavery. Instead you believe that the fruits of one's labor belong to
some mysterious group of "people in charge" and they will deign to allow
one to keep some portion of their labor, predicated upon nothing more
than their whim.

You may think it's a political issue. I and everyone I know consider it
a philosophical and moral issue. There is no middle ground here. I will
never believe that my and others' labors belong to that shadowy cabal,
and you will never believe that individuals have absolute right to their
labors and the results thereof.

If this country ever moves to your way of thinking me and mine will be
seeking better abodes outside of the US. I hope it never comes to that
but I will not be a slave to you or the government you desire.

> (2) If society wants to retain capital accumulation as a fundamental
> value AND be a real democracy, as opposed to a plutocracy, wealth from
> the top will have to be distributed down the wealth scale, presumably
> through a variety of taxing and spending policies, such as is done in
> the social democracies of Scandinavia.

You keep saying "democracy" as if it means the US political system. We
are not a "democracy," thank God. Democracy is two wolves and a lamb
voting on what to have for lunch. We are a Representative Republic
governed by a Constitution. That Constitution protects each individual
from the government and more, from the rapaciousness of a mob. How do
you plan to get around that obstacle?

> Not perfect places, but much better economically for average and poor
> citizens than my country, the USA.

Interesting. Given that there is nothing stopping anyone from emigrating
to Scandinavian countries one wonders why the exodus hasn't begun.

> (3) Your insistence that being taxed for the overall good of society
> (e.g., to lower inequality, to minimize poverty, to provide decent
> universal services) is "punishment" suggests a lack of social
> responsibility that no successful society can survive. You are a
> canary in a coal mine alerting people paying attention to the moral
> collapse of America -- and it's collapsing from the top, not the
> bottom.

I completely reject your notion of "social responsibility." I can be
responsible for only those things over which I have control. Since I
have no control over "society" I cannot be held responsible for it. I
can't be responsible for the homeless drunk guy downtown because I have
no control over him and the choices he made to end up where he is. I
cannot be responsible for the illiterate 16 year old male on the
basketball court because I have no control over his upbringing. I can't
be held responsible for anything you'd like to force on me because I
cannot control the factors that lead to the problems you'd cite.

I am responsible for ensuring my children grow up into intelligent,
educated, law abiding adults and I've done that. I'm responsible for
providing myself and my family food, shelter, clothing and all other
necessities and I've done that. I'm responsible for those things because
that's what I have direct control over.

\

> Plutocracy is the problem; democracy is the answer -- not only for
> society as a whole, but for your (emelks') angry delusions of rich guy
> persecution. (Another possible answer for your self-righteous,
> anti-social delusions: find a New Testament with red words and read
> them.)

Democracy is no answer, it's a poison pill. As for "plutocracy" you
throw the tag around as a given but I reject your assumption that we
have a plutocracy. We definitely have an out of control government and
if that's what you call "plutocracy" I'll gladly concur. Yet I doubt
that you define it that way since you want government to exercise
control over every aspect of human life.

You and I have two completely opposite views of human life and how it
should be structured. We disagree on all the fundamentals.

May 17, 2014, 10:39 PM

Jerry Hartnett:

This is the most well written thought provoking analysis I have read. If
all of Summers' implied and actual questions were addressed and answered
as objectively as his analysis we would have a very clear starting point
in how to fix our economic structure. If only Mr. Summers was not so
political in his personal behavior.

May 18, 2014, 8:57 AM

Carl Legg:

@emelks "You insist that the fruits of one's labor are not theirs to use
they see fit--the very definition of slavery."

No. That's the exact opposite of what is being suggested. You're missing
the central idea, which is that fiscal policy, over time, determines
wealth-class ratios. Not a political party. Not some special interest
group.

Today's ratios are approaching historically unhealthy levels (French
Revolution, Great Depression, etc.). The 99%, and especially the broad
middle and lower classes, are becoming more and more "slave-like" to the
0.1% classes, simply due to profoundly imbalanced wealth ratios (and
getting worse).

Maybe you've never realized that a nation's tax structure DETERMINES
(over time) the relative wealth ratios between socioeconomic classes in
a free-market. Look, here's a question and an exercise for you.
Question: Do you think there's such thing as an unhealthy ratio of
wealth between classes? Yes? No? If yes, what is a fair ratio or range
of fairness? And how do we determine that ratio as a moral or ethical
polity?

Assuming you answered "yes" to above, here's an exercise in determining
a fair range of 1% to 99% wealth ratio. Let's start with the 1% class
owning over 50% of a country's capital wealth. Historically, when has
this happened? We know that it happened just before the French
Revolution. We know that allowing 50% of a nation's wealth to flow into
the hands of a tiny minority results in horrific suffering of the common
citizen. Agreed? No? Tell me why.

So how about 45% of a nation's wealth in the hands of the 1%. Is that
healthy? Why or why not? What does history tell us? We know that, in the
early 1920s, top marginal tax rates were reduced from 75% to 25%. We
know this allowed 1%-class wealth holding to shoot up from 30% to 45% in
just ten years (with a corresponding 15% drop in 99%-wealth in those
same 10 years). The result was a Great Depression.

We understand the disastrous results of tax codes creating too much
wealth in the hands of too few, and the fatal consequences. This is not
about some political party deciding "how much each class should own".
It's not about some moral philosophy determining "what is fair". We're
simply looking at the HEALTH of a nation, defined as reasonably shared
prosperity and well-being.

As we've learned, the healthiest socioeconomic period in world history
was USA 1945-1980. This period was created by a fiscal policy that
prevented a tiny minority from amassing excessive and unwarranted
wealth, but kept an OPTIMUM balance of wealth among all classes. If you
don't think this is true, please tell me why. We're all students here, I
hope.\

May 18, 2014, 5:19 PM

Arthur Martin:

dear emelks:

\(1) I never said you were rich, but that you expressed a persecuted
rich person world-view. The fact that you're not rich just makes your
positions more tragic, as noted by Clegg above.

\(2) If you raise your reading comprehension game a little, you will see
that I have not advocated any form of government in my comments beyond
the idea of democracy, which is not really a form of government but the
principle that the people being governed get to decide how, including
the fundamental values upon which any governing will be based. In my
opinion, a Scandinavian type social democracy would be better than the
rampant plutocracy under which we Americans suffer, but that does not
mean I advocate that form of governance. That would be "reform," like
FDR's new deal, that would leave in place the basic structures of
capitalism, but try to temper them with policies aimed at ensuring the
wealth society generates is to some extent fairly shared throughout
society, as opposed to hoarded at the top through the money makes money
logic of accumulation that defines capitalism. Although at one time I
hopefully imagined the possibility for reform, and came up with an idea
for a more democratic form of America's system of government, including
proportional representation using cumulative voting, I have come to
believe, based in part on exposure to views such as those you have
expressed, that reform is not viable and we need to head beyond reform
and straight to "regroup." In my mind, this would entail giving up on
the "nation-state" as a form of social organization and decentralizing
into not-specifically-geographic polities of like-minded people (more
like churches) who would be free to work together to create the kinds of
societies and ways of living that best suit them, as long as, of course,
they do not interfere with other groups' abilities to do the same. See,
I have no interest in imposing my views on you; I believe you and yours
should be able to live as you see fit -- as long as you don't infringe
on any one else's right to do the same. My interest is actually in being
part of a society where I don't have to deal with people like you
(meaning people who reject the concept of social responsibility). (It
would be interesting to see what kinds of polities anti-social people
like you would come up with; some would probably change and be happy to
be socially responsible as long as the group did not include the
"others" conservatives love to hate...)

\3) I agree our views are fundamentally at odds. People who are
anti-democracy typically either don't understand what it means or are
elitists who think they are part of some select group that should get to
rule over the majority (surely American racism plays a role in the
existence of this view, particularly among the non-wealthy). This
anti-democracy "elite rule" view is so contrary to the founding idea of
America as inscribed in the Declaration of Independence, it is absurd
for anyone holding it to consider themselves a patriotic American (as I
have a sneaking suspicion you do, emelks, although that is an assumption
based on stereotyping). It's true that some of the drafters of the
Constitution of 1787 were concerned with restricting democracy and
keeping the reins of power in the hands of the wealth-holding class, but
unfortunately for those who share that anti-democratic impulse, the
ideal of democracy predates the Constitution, which cannot take away the
fundamental right of Americans (there since the very beginning in 1776)
to abolish any form of government that is not operating in our interests
and to institute new government based on values reflecting those
interests. (Read the text if you don't believe it.) That is the basic
idea of democracy, and no one can deny it is at the root of what America
is all about. You can philosophically reject that founding value, but
you cannot reasonably deny it's existence or that your rejection of it
constitutes a rejection of the idea upon which the American nation was
founded.

\4) Finally, if you cannot see that America is a plutocracy -- a society
ruled by and for the wealthy -- I would assert that you either aren't
looking or you have some kind of ideological or psychological blinders
on, perhaps similar to the blinders that led many non-affluent Southern
white people to support the slave owners' rebellion in 1860.

May 18, 2014, 6:13 PM

emelks:

@Carl Legg

> The conversation needs to find a way. Piketty seems to be opening new
> debate, and that's a good thing.

I'd be happy to engage in conversation but this platform is utterly
incapable of hosting it. Do you know of another place, preferably a
forum, where posts aren't delayed for hours and editing functions are a
bit easier? I can code HTML if I must but it gets old fast.

I'd like to respond in depth to your several posts but really, this
comment section is just terrible for that kind of conversation.

In answer to:

> Question: Do you think there's such thing as an unhealthy ratio of
> wealth between classes?

No, I do not believe there is a numerical ratio of wealth between
classes that is "unhealthy." There are far too many assumptions buried
in that question.

My first thought upon reading your initial post to me is that until
recently, I was not forced under penalty of law to do business with ANY
entity other than the government-run utilities like electric companies,
telephone companies, etc. Being forced by law to pay money to a business
for a product came into being with the PPACA in 2010.

In light of that fact, how has anyone managed to take any of my personal
income or assets without my knowledge? I've read others claim that the
upper classes have somehow reached into my life and snatched away a
portion of my paycheck but I have yet to catch them at it. The only
entity that reaches into every paycheck and takes my earnings is, yes,
government. I'd be interested in hearing how those dastardly 1%ers
managed to take my money, property and/or assets without my awareness.

> > "You insist that the fruits of one's labor are not theirs to use
> > they see fit--the very definition of slavery."
>
> No. That's the exact opposite of what is being suggested.

You must have missed where on May 17, 2014, 2:15 PM Arthur Martin wrote:

> (1) One is "allowed" to keep as much of one's earnings as the people
> in charge of one's society decides is appropriate.

I am quite serious about engaging in a rational conversation on this
topic. If you know of a venue, please post a URL. Thanks in advance.

May 18, 2014, 10:31 PM

Emelks:

@Arthur Martin

> See, I have no interest in imposing my views on you; I believe you and
> yours should be able to live as you see fit -- as long as you don't
> infringe on any one else's right to do the same.

I cannot fathom how you wrote this with a straight face after thousands
of words advocating government dictating the financial lives of
citizens.

But on the bright side, I would love to see a society where people live
their lives as each sees fit without the government forcing behaviors
and compelling actions upon the entire population. A return to pre-1930s
jurisprudence would be perfect. Allow a man to grow wheat for his own
consumption and keep the federal government out of it altogether.

Prior to the Federal scope creep, the states served as the
pseudo-churches you described. A return to state sovereignty and the
principle of subsidiarity would go a long way toward reaching your
desired goal. On that we can also agree.

As for the rest, if Mr. Legg has a better platform for a serious
discussion I'll address the remainder of your post there. This platform
is entirely too unwieldy for this sort of interaction. I imagine Mr Legg
wouldn't object to your input.

May 18, 2014, 10:40 PM

Clegg:

@emelks "I do not believe there is a numerical ratio of wealth between
classes that is "unhealthy.""

Let's try a little exercise. If there is no unhealthy wealth ratio
between the 1% and 99% classes, let's consider a tax code that cycles
virtually ALL wealth to the 1%. Over time, that puts 99% ownership of
America in the hands of 1% of the population.

Is that healthy? No? (this is a textbook description of pure Plutocracy
- not possible to sustain in reality, but an good illustration)

How about 90/10? or 80/20? If 99/1 isn't fair, then what is? And how do
we make that determination as a polity?

IMPORTANT: If you don't understand that a nation's fiscal policy (its
tax code) absolutely determines, over time, this fundamental
class-wealth ratio. this conversation will make no sense to you. If you
have any doubt about this, please state your reasons, with historical
examples if possible.

This comment site is indeed SLOW.

May 19, 2014, 1:52 AM

emelks:

Mr Clegg--

How in the world can a tax code "cycle virtually ALL wealth to the 1%"?
Taxes are collected by government and distributed by that same
government. Are you saying that the government is transferring tax
dollars to the bank accounts of that mysterious 1% of individual income
earners? I would very much like to see evidence of this. Are you saying
that the federal government is not collecting taxes from that 1%? If so,
that's easily disproven by the IRS. Source from the IRS tables at
[http://www.irs.gov/uac/SOI-Tax-Stats-Individual-Income-Tax-Rates-and-Tax-Shares\#\_pagi](http://www.irs.gov/uac/SOI-Tax-Stats-Individual-Income-Tax-Rates-and-Tax-Shares#_pagi)\
 One could say that companies like GE are receiving loads of tax dollars
for questionable government acquisition, in addition to legislated
purchase of their failing produce (CFL lightbulbs, etc.) In that I'd
agree and would go further. In my opinion the federal government is at
the cusp of outright fascism (defined as "a governmental system led by a
dictator having complete power, forcibly suppressing opposition and
criticism, regimenting all industry, commerce, etc., and emphasizing an
aggressive nationalism and often racism."
[http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/fascism?s=t)](http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/fascism?s=t))

But we aren't talking about companies. We are talking about individuals
and I know of not one instance wherein a wealthy individual receives tax
dollars from the Treasury for the sole purpose of passing tax money to
"rich" people. I know several people who do receive thousands of dollars
of tax money that they did not pay via the EITC, which is in fact the
Treasury sending tax dollars to an individual for no other reason than
to send money to "poor" people, but that doesn't fit your scenario
either.

Perhaps you're talking about things like tax breaks, etc. If that's the
case, one must be a tax attorney to even begin to flesh out that
nightmare. I am in favor of a flat 10% tax on all individual earnings
and the elimination of FICA and the gazillion other federal taxes we all
pay (eg the Spanish American war tax on phone bills.) That removes
politicians' ability to write tax exemptions since the politicians do
not have the power to grant waivers to this group over that group.
Limiting the power of the federal government limits the federal
politicians' ability to favor one over another and as a side effect
eliminates a great deal of lobbying.

> IMPORTANT: If you don't understand that a nation's fiscal policy (its
> tax code) absolutely determines, over time, this fundamental
> class-wealth ratio. this conversation will make no sense to you. If
> you have any doubt about this, please state your reasons, with
> historical examples if possible.

Somehow we went from fiscal policy to tax code. The two are not
synonymous. Please clarify which you are referencing. If you want to
talk about the tax code I can talk in generalities but because I am not
a tax attorney I can't be in-the-weeds specific about a particular part
of the tax code. If you want to talk in generalities that's fine.

You've made a few assumptions that I don't hold. First, you assume that
your definition of "class" is 1) universal, 2) defined, 3) static and 4)
immutable. You also failed to define "wealth." What are we talking
about? Assets? Assets plus income? Assets, income and debts? What
exactly do you mean by "wealth?"

Next, you assume that there is a numerical proportion that describes the
"perfect" distribution of vague "wealth" among undefined "classes" that
will in some unspoken way prevent a mysterious, unspecified evil. I've
yet to parse precisely what that threat might be, but some commentors
seem to suggest that civil war and/or violence will occur if they don't
get their way politically. Is that what you are saying?

In my particular case, I have no problem with anyone owning whatever
they've earned. I have grown my own economic situation into a
comfortable position with which I am content. I have no envy or anger at
anyone who owns more than I, or whose checking account is larger, or
whatever. I recognize that threats to anyone else's economic condition
based solely upon governmental decree of "fairness" is a great and
imminent threat to my own economic condition. I worked hard to pay for
my home and property and will not accept anyone's claim to a part of it
due to "fairness." I can't expect anyone else to accept a similar claim
unless I'm willing to accept it myself, and that will never happen.

> This comment site is indeed SLOW.

Undoubtedly. If I work up a generic forum would you be willing to go
there to continue? This commenting format is incredibly frustrating.

I appreciate your courtesy and avoidance of adolescent name calling and
the like. It's rare to find an adult on the opposite side of an issue
who is willing to have a rational discussion. Thank you.

May 19, 2014, 5:43 PM

emelks:

Mr. Clegg--

I decided to open a generic forum to continue this conversation. If you
register, please copy the posts you'd like me to respond to over there
and we can converse there. If you don't register, I don't want to spend
the time responding in depth.

Oh, and I set it up for admin registration approval to keep the spammers
out. I'll approve your registration ASAP.

[http://rationalpiketty.freeforums.org/index.php](http://rationalpiketty.freeforums.org/index.php)

May 19, 2014, 6:33 PM

joyce:

I have always look forward for this day to tell the world about the the
great powers of Dr.Eziza. This great man called Dr.Eziza was able to
bring back my lover who left me, And within the space of 48 hours
Dr.Eziza brought my lover back and since then my love life have been
more lovely and peaceful than i ever had. You can also strengthen your
relationship or get your lover back by contacting Dr.Eziza on
ezizaoguntemple@gmail.com or call him on +2348058176289 and i assure you
that you will get a better relationship after the help of Dr.Eziza

May 20, 2014, 7:52 AM

Carl Legg:

"How in the world can a tax code "cycle virtually ALL wealth to the
1%"?"

Sorry, you're not getting the fundamentals. Of COURSE a government can't
cycle ALL wealth to the 1%. That's exactly my point. There is a LIMIT as
to how much of a nation's wealth a tiny oligarch class can acquire
before that nation implodes. We actually know those ratios.

In 1800 France, the 1% class wealth ratio rose to over 50%, which
triggered the French Revolution. In USA, 1% class wealth grew from 30%
(1918) to 45% (1929), which (in part) triggered the Great Depression.
History suggests that the "red line" of 1% wealth imbalance starts
around 40%. The wealth class can only suck so much wealth from the
bottom 99% before you destroy the foundation of a country, which is its
middle class.

Piketty suggests that the optimal 1% wealth ratio is around 15%. My own
research shows closer to 25% (20-30% range). In any case, today, we're
approaching 40% in USA (red line), and our lower and middle class
socioeconomic metrics are clearly in free-fall.

www.nytimes.com/2014/04/23/upshot/the-american-middle-class-is-no-longer-the-worlds-richest.html

[http://www.princeton.edu/main/news/archive/S39/81/99O06/index.xml?section=topstories](http://www.princeton.edu/main/news/archive/S39/81/99O06/index.xml?section=topstories)

[http://big.assets.huffingtonpost.com/MiddleClass\_6.png](http://big.assets.huffingtonpost.com/MiddleClass_6.png)

[http://www.infohow.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Plutocracy-Reborn.jpg](http://www.infohow.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Plutocracy-Reborn.jpg)

Yes, tax code is part of fiscal policy, and tax code is a key reason for
America's growing wealth class imbalance. For now, forget all the
definitions of wealth, etc.. Simply look at relative socioeconomic
health among all American classes. Compare 1945-1975 period, with the
worsening trickle-down period that has followed.

In 1945-1975, ALL our socioeconomic classes were the healthiest in the
world. Today, our lower and middle classes have fallen, and continue to
fall. You need to understand this reality, and the trend lines, and the
fiscal reasons for it. If you don't see this and acknowledge it, then
there is no reason to continue a conversation about wealth inequality.

May 20, 2014, 8:36 AM

emelks:

Mr Legg--

> Sorry, you're not getting the fundamentals.

I am not an ecomonist and therefore cannot discuss with any degree of
certainty the fine details of economic theory. I approach this topic as
a reasonably educated taxpaying adult whom others are attempting to
persuade to adopt this economic theory and vote it into law via the
policial process. If my ignorance of detailed economic theory means we
cannot converse on the topic, so be it. I never claimed to be an
economist. I do claim to be representative of the people you must
convince in order to implement your preferred theory and so far I'm not
at all convinced.

> Of COURSE a government can't cycle ALL wealth to the 1%. That's
> exactly my point. There is a LIMIT as to how much of a nation's wealth
> a tiny oligarch class can acquire before that nation implodes. We
> actually know those ratios.

You've yet to explain to me precisely *how* that "oligarch" class is
*forcibly taking* money from me *without my knowledge.* How exactly is
that happening? Earlier you said that money is being "transferred" to
the 1% via tax rates. I asked how that can possibly be happening. Please
explain *how that happens* in detail. If I'm missing something critical
I'd like to be made aware of it.

> In 1800 France, the 1% class wealth ratio rose to over 50%, which
> triggered the French Revolution. In USA, 1% class wealth grew from 30%
> (1918) to 45% (1929), which (in part) triggered the Great Depression.
> History suggests that the "red line" of 1% wealth imbalance starts
> around 40%.

Ah, so you're saying that if your preferred political solutions aren't
implemented there will be violence and/or mass suffering in the future.
Interesting.

> The wealth class can only suck so much wealth from the bottom 99%
> before you destroy the foundation of a country, which is its middle
> class.

You keep saying this but you've yet to explain in any detail precisely
*how* the wealthy are "sucking" money from *anyone.* You are assuming
that it's happening, which is fine if you want to make that assumption,
but you can't expect everyone else to just nod their heads.

I keep asking for an explanation of precisely HOW those people are
forcibly taking my money from me. No one has yet offered an explanation.
You can't expect me to simply accept your claim simply because you say
so.

You are asking me and others to accept a huge risk to our own lives,
financial and otherwise, in order to prevent some violence or suffering
in the future. Some are even insisting that we accept a complete
paradigm change in the nature of the relationship between government and
citizen. Surely you realize that extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence. Thus far I see only statistical assertions and
political assumptions, neither of which qualify as extraordinary
evidence.

> Yes, tax code is part of fiscal policy, and tax code is a key reason
> for America's growing wealth class imbalance.

Tax codes are part of fiscal policy but fiscal policy is not simply tax
codes. There is much more to fiscal policy than that.

> For now, forget all the definitions of wealth, etc.. Simply look at
> relative socioeconomic health among all American classes. Compare
> 1945-1975 period, with the worsening trickle-down period that has
> followed.

You are grossly simplifing the cause and effect of global conditions
during that time period. In 1945 most Western economies were decimated
by WW2. It wasn't hard at all for the US to be first in economic output
since Europe was a smoking ruin and Aisa had yet to become
industrialized. You aren't accounting at all for the advent of
production in Asia during the '70s and the effect of that on the US, and
you skipped the impact of unions on the situation as well. Then there is
the demographic issue. It's a very complex topic that cannot be
distilled into simple tax rate comparisons, and attempting to draw
economic and political conclusions from a grossly simplified comparison
is inherently dangerous.

My conscious memory of economic conditions began in the mid to late
1970s. I distinctly recall waiting in gas lines, the adults talking
around the table about a car loan with an interest rate of 22%, my
mother crying in the grocery store because she didn't have enough cash
to cover the cart contents and cursing Jimmy Carter for a fool. I
remember seeing blindfolded kidnapped people on the TV and some guy in
black robes speaking in a strange language, and my mother telling me he
was saying "death to America." Before the mid to late '70s I wasn't
around or sufficiently capable of understanding events around me, but I
can safely say that my personal experience and the experiences passed
down in my family doesn't match with the notion of economic nirvana
pre-1975, or pre-1980 (which you referenced earlier.)

If you choose not to continue with this conversation, that's fine.
Disappointing but not unexpected since no one has ever answered my basic
questions on this topic, not only here but in other venues. If you
choose to leave the conversation I appreciate your taking the time and
communicating in a rational manner.

May 20, 2014, 9:40 AM

Luke Lea:

Inequalities of wealth or of income are not the real problem.
Inequalities of wealth are. Wage subsidies financed by a graduated
expenditure tax is the only market-friendly answer.

I suspect Summers knows this deep down. He needs to use his considerable
influence to get the international community started down the difficult
road of implementing a global GET.

May 20, 2014, 3:37 PM

Cindy:

emelks - \
 In response to your request for an explanation "You've yet to explain
to me precisely how that "oligarch" class is forcibly taking money from
me without my knowledge. How exactly is that happening? Earlier you said
that money is being "transferred" to the 1% via tax rates. I asked how
that can possibly be happening. "

There are two factors involved:\
 People who have accumulated more wealth than they need to live are able
to continue to accumulate at even higher rates because the capital gains
tax rate is lower than the income tax rate. You may say that has nothing
to do with taking money from you, but it does in subtle ways. For
example, we all need roads, defense, schools, etc. because the people
with great wealth are not paying their fair share of taxes to support
our common infrastructure, the rest of us are shouldering a heavier
burden. You may say, but my taxes are lower now than they were [insert
previous time here]. But there are also a lot of hidden burdens we are
shouldering (or our children will be carrying later) for example, the VA
is under-funded, the national debt is rising, etc.

The second way they are taking money from you is also subtle. It is in
the excessively high pay (including stock options, etc) the top 1% has
been able to claim and the reduced income tax on their earnings. The pay
increases operating costs for the company which has some effect on wages
available for other workers and on product costs.

May 20, 2014, 6:40 PM

emelks:

Cindy--

Thank you for providing an answer for my question.

My first reaction was that your answer is quite different than the
hyperbolic claims made earlier. There is a huge difference between "the
1% are stealing money from everyone else!" and "tax policy favors high
earners." Hysterical and unfounded assertions don't serve the cause of
those attempting to implement this system well at all.

I do take issue with several aspects of your answer.

> People who have accumulated more wealth than they need to live are
> able to continue to accumulate at even higher rates because the
> capital gains tax rate is lower than the income tax rate. You may say
> that has nothing to do with taking money from you, but it does in
> subtle ways. For example, we all need roads, defense, schools, etc.
> because the people with great wealth are not paying their fair share
> of taxes to support our common infrastructure, the rest of us are
> shouldering a heavier burden.

First, please define "fair share." A numerical definition would be
perfect.

Then please define how you calculate how much money an individual "needs
to live." Please include the assumptions you're using to arrive at that
number. For example, how many cars does a family "need to live," how
many square feet of housing does a family "need to live," etc.

Then please explain how taking more money from a small percentage of the
population will address enormous Federal budget shortfalls.

Finally, please explain why the enormous and ever exploding federal
budget (or rather endless "continuing resolutions") regularly fails to
address the items you mentioned. I've heard that complaint for decades
and no matter how high the tax rates or how huge the federal budget,
it's always the same complaint.

\

> The second way they are taking money from you is also subtle. It is in
> the excessively high pay (including stock options, etc) the top 1% has
> been able to claim and the reduced income tax on their earnings. The
> pay increases operating costs for the company which has some effect on
> wages available for other workers and on product costs.

Interesting. So under your preferred system the company that is writing
the paychecks isn't allowed to determine compensation levels for
executives. Who *is* allowed to make that determination? What legal and
moral reasoning permits that entity to forcibly take that function from
a private company?

Why would you limit this to the "top 1%?" How will you limit that entity
to those people only? Logically that entity will have the authority to
determine compensation for *all* employees. There is no logic that
limits the control to that 1% of earners.

Have you considered that the government (which I assume is the entity
you'd task with determining "appropriate" executive compensation) would
become truly fascist if the government took over this task?

This is precisely the sort of thing that makes people like me stop and
take note. You are in effect saying that in order to make others pay
their "fair share" we must relinquish control of our own financial
lives, in this case the compensation for our labors, to yet more
bureaucrats. Do you see why we refuse to go along with such a system?

Frankly I don't think executive compensation has much at all to do with
an "effect on wages available for other workers and on product costs."
If there is an effect it is incredibly small and far overshadowed by
other impacts, eg. government mandates, global economic situations, raw
material access, etc. That is an entire topic of its own.

I do appreciate you addressing my question. Though I disagree with your
assumptions and conclusions I do recognize that you alone of all other
commenters have tackled the question head on. Thank you.

May 21, 2014, 9:23 AM

**Post a Comment**

Name\

Email\

Comments (you may use HTML tags for style)\

Verification\

\

Note: Several minutes will pass while the system is processing and
posting your comment. Do not resubmit during this time or your comment
will post multiple times.

[Printer Friendly PDF](/pdf/32/the_inequality_puzzle.pdf)

[Email Article](javascript:mailpage())

[Single
Page](http://www.democracyjournal.org/32/the-inequality-puzzle.php?page=all)

Share:

[![facebook](/_resources/images/icon_facebook.gif)](http://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.democracyjournal.org%2F32%2Fthe-inequality-puzzle.php)[![twitter](/_resources/images/icon_twitter.gif)](http://twitter.com/share?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.democracyjournal.org%2F32%2Fthe-inequality-puzzle.php&text=The%20Inequality%20Puzzle&via=DemJournal)

[![Bookmark and
Share](/_resources/images/addthis_more.gif)](http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250)

Lawrence H. Summers is the Charles W. Eliot University Professor and
President Emeritus at Harvard University. He served as the 71st
Secretary of the Treasury for President Clinton and the Director of the
National Economic Council for President Obama.

[Advertise on Democracy](http://democracyjournal.org/advertise.php)
===================================================================

![image](/_resources/images/title_editors_picks.gif)

#### News

##### [Summers’s Review of Piketty Draws Wide Praise](http://www.democracyjournal.org/news/summerss-piece-for-democracy-draws-wide-praise.php)

Democracy: A Journal of Ideas: Lawrence H. Summers’s
[review](http://www.democracyjournal.org/32/the-inequality-puzzle.php?)
of Thomas Piketty’s *Capital in the Twenty-First Century*, released last
week in a preview of the upcoming Summer Issue, has received widespread
commentary and acclaim.

#### News

##### [Konczal Discusses “The Voluntarism Fantasy” on “Majority Report”](http://www.democracyjournal.org/news/konczal-on-majority-report-discussing-the-voluntarism-fantasy.php)

The Majority Report: On the March 19 edition of “The Majority Report,”
Sam Seder
[interviewed](http://majority.fm/2014/03/19/319-mike-konczal-the-voluntarism-fantasy/)
Mike Konczal on his recent essay for *Democracy*, “[The Voluntarism
Fantasy](http://www.democracyjournal.org/29/fortress-unionism.php).”

#### News

##### [*Washington Post* Cites *Democracy*’s Role in CFPB Creation](http://www.democracyjournal.org/news/washington-post-cites-democracys-role-in-establishing-cfpb.php)

Washington Post: In the January 11 edition of *The Washington Post*, a
story by Lydia DePillis on the start of the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau cited *Democracy*’s role in the creation and
development of the agency.

![image](/_resources/images/title_follow_democracy.gif)

[![facebook](/_resources/images/icon_facebook.gif)](http://www.facebook.com/pages/Democracy-A-Journal-of-Ideas/188165324600426)[![twitter](/_resources/images/icon_twitter.gif)](http://twitter.com/#!/DemJournal)

![image](/_resources/navimages/footernav_topbar.gif)\

[Subscribe](/subscribe.php) | [Site Map](/sitemap.php) | [Privacy
Policy](/privacypolicy.php) | [Contact](/contact.php) | Copyright 2014.
Democracy: A Journal of Ideas, Inc. All Rights Reserved

![image](/_resources/navimages/footernav_topbar.gif)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.democracyjournal.org/32/the-inequality-puzzle.php?page=all
