![image](http://www.zerotier.com/piwik/piwik.php?idsite=1)

[Home](/index.html)ZeroTier News Blog

[ZeroTier Networks Blog](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/ "ZeroTier Networks Blog")
=================================================================================

### Menu

[Skip to content](#content "Skip to content")

-   [Home](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/)

[Subscribe (RSS)](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?feed=rss2)

The State of NAT Traversal
==========================

*This is a technical deep-dive post. If you aren’t interested in
under-the-hood network geekery, you can safely skip it.*

For those who don’t know, NAT stands for *Network Address Translation*.
If you’re on a typical network, your system probably has an IP address
like *10.1.2.3* or *192.168.0.66*. These are private IPs. They are [not
your real Internet IP address](https://www.google.com/#q=ip). Between
you and the network there is a device called a “NAT router” that
performs intelligent address translation back and forth.

NAT was invented because IPv4, the IP scheme that still runs most
Internet sites, has an address space that is too small to allow all
devices to have “real” addresses. Its successor, known as IPv6, does not
have this limitation but is still fairly early in its adoption curve.
Migrating a system as huge as the Internet to a new protocol version
takes a very long time.

ZeroTier One runs over a peer to peer network, which means that allowing
devices to communicate directly is central to how it operates (at scale
and with acceptable performance). Since most users are behind NAT
devices, people often wonder how exactly peer to peer connectivity is
established.

### NAT is Traversable

In reading the Internet chatter on this subject I’ve been shocked by how
many people don’t really understand this, hence the reason this post was
written. Lots of people think NAT is a show-stopper for peer to peer
communication, but it isn’t. More than 90% of NATs can be traversed,
with most being traversable in reliable and deterministic ways.

At the end of the day anywhere from 4% (our numbers) to 8% (an [older
number from
Google](https://developers.google.com/talk/libjingle/important_concepts?csw=1#candidates))
of all traffic over a peer to peer network must be relayed to provide
reliable service. Providing relaying for that small a number is fairly
inexpensive, making reliable and scalable P2P networking that *always*
works quite achievable.

### UDP Hole Punching

The most common and effective technique for NAT traversal is known as
*UDP hole punching*.

UDP stands for *User Datagram Protocol*. It’s sort of TCP’s smaller and
simpler cousin, a protocol that allows a piece of software to send a
single discrete packet from its own address to another IP and port.

A number of Internet protocols use UDP such as DNS, many games, media
streaming protocols, etc. For these to be usable behind NAT, NAT routers
must implement a concept of “UDP connections.” They do this by listening
for outgoing UDP packets and when one is seen creating a mapping that
says “private IP:port UDP <-\> public IP:port UDP.” Any further packets
leaving the private network will be remapped in the same way, and
replies from the external system contacted will be remapped in the
opposite direction. This allows a two-way UDP conversation to be
initiated by a device behind NAT.

UDP hole punching exploits this concept of a “conversation.” It works
like this. (Slight variations on this procedure exist, but this is the
basic idea.)

**1.** Alice and Bob are both behind NAT. They both know about a third
party — let’s call him Ziggy — that is *not* behind NAT. Alice and Bob
periodically send UDP messages to Ziggy, who records their existence and
their *public* (Internet-side of NAT) IP addresses and ports.

**2.** When Alice wants to talk to Bob, she sends a message to Ziggy
that says “hey I want to call Bob.” Ziggy then sends a message to *both*
Alice and Bob. The message to Alice contains Bob’s public IP and port,
and the message to Bob contains Alice’s.

**3.** Alice and Bob *simultaneously* (upon receipt) send messages to
each other. Alice’s NAT router sees a message leave Alice for Bob’s
public IP and port, while Bob’s sees the same thing in the direction of
Alice. Both NAT routers create a mapping entry as described above. Each
NAT router then interprets the other party’s initialization packet as a
*reply* in a two-way UDP “connection,” and interprets further packets
likewise. As long as Alice and Bob send keepalive messages to one
another frequently enough (about every 120 seconds for typical routers),
this conversation can be kept going indefinitely.

Two points about this. First, the folks who say NAT makes P2P impossible
are *almost* right. NAT does make *true* serverless peer to peer
virtually impossible without incredibly difficult and often unreliable
methods. But in practice setting up a triangle relationship like the one
above is easy, and since the messages are small the server’s bandwidth
requirements are not large. A single relatively inexpensive cloud server
instance can easily provide NAT traversal services for millions of
devices. Second, if you’re thinking “wow that’s an ugly hack” you are
correct. It is indeed ugly and a hack, but so is NAT.

The scenario above is exactly how ZeroTier works except for one minor
wrinkle: the message from Alice to Ziggy that says “I want to call Bob”
*is her first message to Bob*. ZeroTier’s servers also act as relays.
When they see traffic being sent from one peer to another, they relay it
*and* periodically send a message called *VERB\_RENDEZVOUS* that tells
each party to attempt NAT traversal. If it works, they stop relaying and
start talking directly. But if NAT traversal never works, both peers can
just keep relaying forever. This provides connections that start working
instantly and always work for everyone. In common programming parlance
we can call this “lazy NAT traversal.” It’s the secret to how ZeroTier
One provisions connections so quickly.

Lazy traversal also simplifies things. Most peer to peer protocols
perform a complicated endpoint characterization step prior to initiating
connectivity. That requires a complicated state machine and a lot of
state transitions that must be coordinated to determine things like “am
I behind NAT” and “what kind of NAT am I behind?” The lazy method just
skips all that. Connection setup is stateless.

### Types of NAT

There are four major types of NAT encountered in the field. The
terminology used is somewhat confusing… I’m not really sure what is
meant by a “cone.” But [here they
are](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_address_translation#Methods_of_port_translation).
The important thing here is that the UDP hole punching technique works
for only the first three. The fourth type, known as *symmetric NAT*, is
problematic.

If one host is behind symmetric NAT, traversal can still occur. That’s
because the host that isn’t restricted in this manner can reply to the
initial packet from the host that is and in so doing “learn” its
per-destination IP and port mapping. But if both hosts are behind
symmetric NAT, hole punching can’t work… at least not reliably.

### Traversing Between Two-Party Symmetric NATs

There is one ~~even scarier hack~~ technique that can occasionally work
even if both parties are behind symmetric NAT. Many symmetric NATs
assign port numbers sequentially. So in addition to trying Alice’s first
IP and port, Bob can also try Alice at IP:port+1 and possibly also
IP:port+2.

ZeroTier doesn’t do this *yet*, but it probably will in a future
release. Before enabling it we’d like to do a little more field testing
and try to figure out just how often this works and whether it’s worth
the trouble and small amount of overhead.

But returning to the numbers cited above: only 4-8% of users cannot
establish direct links even though as many as 99% are behind NAT. The
situation for a peer to peer protocol in the wild is far from hopeless.

### The Same Network Problem

Another difficult situation arises if two peers are actually on the same
local network behind the same NAT router.

If that NAT router is traversable, NAT-traversal will almost always work
as-usual. But this isn’t optimal. It imposes a small performance
penalty, as traffic must now pop its head out of the LAN and back into
it and traverse the router twice. What we’d ideally want is for traffic
on the same LAN to simply go directly from host A to B.

The simplest solution is to use UDP broadcasts. This is what many
applications including ZeroTier do. A packet is sent to broadcast every
60 seconds or so that says “here I am.” Other peers see it and after a
proper cryptographic handshake to verify identity establish a direct
connection over LAN.

It might be tempting for peers to encode their private IP address and
send it to the intermediate server and/or to the other peer. I thought
about this when writing ZeroTier. On the plus side, this would work even
on large segmented networks where UDP broadcasts don’t make it
everywhere. But the problem is that this exposes internal configuration
details about the network to potentially random external peers. Many
network security administrators are not going to like that, so I decided
against it. I tried to think of a way to anonymize the data but
couldn’t, since the IPv4 private address space is so small that no form
of hashing will adequately protect against exhaustive search.

### UPnP and Other Semi-Standards

Some NAT devices support various methods of intentionally opening ports
from the inside. The most common of these is called [Universal
Plug-and-Play](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Plug_and_Play)
(UPnP).

ZeroTier doesn’t support it since typically it’s only found in small
router devices such as home routers. These usually implement some form
of “full-cone” NAT that can be traversed using ordinary hole punching,
rendering UPnP unnecessary for our use case. It’ll probably be supported
eventually, since there are sure to be a few exceptions to that rule and
the goal is to support traversal in as many scenarios as can possibly be
achieved.

UPnP is a fairly ugly semi-standard. It’s not likely to be supported any
more widely than it is already.

### NAT Murders Kittens

![image](/misc/kitten.jpg)

Due to IPv4 limitations, NAT is deployed on most networks. IPv6 is
really the only way around this. Yet most don’t realize the cost in
kittens. Every time a NAT device remaps an IP address, a kitten dies.
This amounts to trillions upon trillions of needless kitten fatalities
every day. NAT traversal techniques do not avoid the carnage. They only
hide it from the user.

In all seriousness though: NAT is an awful thing. It’s an ugly
workaround to a fundamental limitation, and the sooner it’s rendered
obsolete by IPv6 the sooner we can start really deploying a whole new
generation of Internet protocols.

Other than the obvious downside of increased software complexity, the
worst thing about NAT is the inherent resource overhead it imposes on
protocols. This is true even in conventional client-server protocol
designs. Because NAT is almost always stateful, frequent keepalive
packets are required to hold all connections open. This is true for TCP
as well as UDP. If you don’t send a packet about once every 120 seconds
(for typical NATs), your connection will be forgotten and will reset.
Users behind NATs who use SSH have likely discovered this when
attempting to leave SSH sessions open for a long time, and SSH (like
most protocols) has a protocol keepalive option available as a
workaround.

For desktop/laptop and server systems these tiny messages don’t matter
much, but for small mobile devices they’re a battery life killer. They
also make implementing peer to peer *anything* on a mobile device very
difficult. In the near term, porting ZeroTier’s protocol to mobile
without significantly impacting battery life will require some fairly
heroic hacks around using platform-provided “push” notifications and
other cleverness. None of that would be necessary without NAT, as peers
could simply notify one another of their new IP:port locations whenever
those locations changed. Usually that’s not very frequent, maybe once or
twice a day at maximum, and would not impose much overhead.

So if you want to see truly efficient, scalable, and simple Internet
protocols in the future, by all means **use IPv6 and encourage others to
do the same**. It’s not just about IPv4 address exhaustion. It’s also
about fundamentally sound protocol design that dispenses with the need
for any number of awful hacks like the ones discussed in this post.

… not to mention the kittens.

This entry was posted in
[Technical](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?cat=5 "View all posts in Technical")
on [August 26, 2014](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=226 "7:59 pm") by
[adamierymenko](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?author=1 "View all posts by adamierymenko").

### Post navigation

[← ZeroTier One Quietly Exits
Beta](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=219)

Search for:

### Recent Posts

-   [The State of NAT Traversal](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=226)
-   [ZeroTier One Quietly Exits
    Beta](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=219)
-   [Version 0.9.2: Virtual networks on Windows are now “real”
    networks](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=206)
-   [Creating a Provider-Agnostic Private Backplane Network in the Cloud
    with ZeroTier One](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=176)
-   [A small price reduction, and
    update](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=173)

### Recent Comments

### Archives

-   [August 2014](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?m=201408)
-   [July 2014](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?m=201407)
-   [March 2014](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?m=201403)
-   [February 2014](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?m=201402)
-   [January 2014](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?m=201401)

### Categories

-   [General
    News](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?cat=1 "View all posts filed under General News")
-   [Technical](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?cat=5 "View all posts filed under Technical")

### Meta

-   [Log in](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/wp-login.php)
-   [Entries
    RSS](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?feed=rss2 "Syndicate this site using RSS 2.0")
-   [Comments
    RSS](https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?feed=comments-rss2 "The latest comments to all posts in RSS")
-   [WordPress.org](https://wordpress.org/ "Powered by WordPress, state-of-the-art semantic personal publishing platform.")


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://www.zerotier.com/blog/?p=226
