Programming with pcap
=====================

Tim Carstens\
 timcarst **at** yahoo **dot** com\
 Further editing and development by Guy Harris\
 guy **at** alum **dot** mit **dot** edu

Ok, let's begin by defining who this document is written for. Obviously,
some basic knowledge of C is required, unless you only wish to know the
basic theory. You do not need to be a code ninja; for the areas likely
to be understood only by more experienced programmers, I'll be sure to
describe concepts in greater detail. Additionally, some basic
understanding of networking might help, given that this is a packet
sniffer and all. All of the code examples presented here have been
tested on FreeBSD 4.3 with a default kernel.

Getting Started: The format of a pcap application
-------------------------------------------------

The first thing to understand is the general layout of a pcap sniffer.
The flow of code is as follows:

1.  We begin by determining which interface we want to sniff on. In
    Linux this may be something like eth0, in BSD it may be xl1, etc. We
    can either define this device in a string, or we can ask pcap to
    provide us with the name of an interface that will do the job.
2.  Initialize pcap. This is where we actually tell pcap what device we
    are sniffing on. We can, if we want to, sniff on multiple devices.
    How do we differentiate between them? Using file handles. Just like
    opening a file for reading or writing, we must name our sniffing
    "session" so we can tell it apart from other such sessions.
3.  In the event that we only want to sniff specific traffic (e.g.: only
    TCP/IP packets, only packets going to port 23, etc) we must create a
    rule set, "compile" it, and apply it. This is a three phase process,
    all of which is closely related. The rule set is kept in a string,
    and is converted into a format that pcap can read (hence compiling
    it.) The compilation is actually just done by calling a function
    within our program; it does not involve the use of an external
    application. Then we tell pcap to apply it to whichever session we
    wish for it to filter.
4.  Finally, we tell pcap to enter it's primary execution loop. In this
    state, pcap waits until it has received however many packets we want
    it to. Every time it gets a new packet in, it calls another function
    that we have already defined. The function that it calls can do
    anything we want; it can dissect the packet and print it to the
    user, it can save it in a file, or it can do nothing at all.
5.  After our sniffing needs are satisfied, we close our session and are
    complete.

This is actually a very simple process. Five steps total, one of which
is optional (step 3, in case you were wondering.) Let's take a look at
each of the steps and how to implement them.

Setting the device
------------------

This is terribly simple. There are two techniques for setting the device
that we wish to sniff on.

The first is that we can simply have the user tell us. Consider the
following program:

        #include <stdio.h>
        #include <pcap.h>

        int main(int argc, char *argv[])
        {
             char *dev = argv[1];

             printf("Device: %s\n", dev);
             return(0);
        }

The user specifies the device by passing the name of it as the first
argument to the program. Now the string "dev" holds the name of the
interface that we will sniff on in a format that pcap can understand
(assuming, of course, the user gave us a real interface).

The other technique is equally simple. Look at this program:

        #include <stdio.h>
        #include <pcap.h>

        int main(int argc, char *argv[])
        {
            char *dev, errbuf[PCAP_ERRBUF_SIZE];

            dev = pcap_lookupdev(errbuf);
            if (dev == NULL) {
                fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't find default device: %s\n", errbuf);
                return(2);
            }
            printf("Device: %s\n", dev);
            return(0);
        }

In this case, pcap just sets the device on its own. "But wait, Tim," you
say. "What is the deal with the errbuf string?" Most of the pcap
commands allow us to pass them a string as an argument. The purpose of
this string? In the event that the command fails, it will populate the
string with a description of the error. In this case, if
pcap\_lookupdev() fails, it will store an error message in errbuf.
Nifty, isn't it? And that's how we set our device.

Opening the device for sniffing
-------------------------------

The task of creating a sniffing session is really quite simple. For
this, we use pcap\_open\_live(). The prototype of this function (from
the pcap man page) is as follows:

        pcap_t *pcap_open_live(char *device, int snaplen, int promisc, int to_ms,
            char *ebuf)

The first argument is the device that we specified in the previous
section. snaplen is an integer which defines the maximum number of bytes
to be captured by pcap. promisc, when set to true, brings the interface
into promiscuous mode (however, even if it is set to false, it is
possible under specific cases for the interface to be in promiscuous
mode, anyway). to\_ms is the read time out in milliseconds (a value of 0
means no time out; on at least some platforms, this means that you may
wait until a sufficient number of packets arrive before seeing any
packets, so you should use a non-zero timeout). Lastly, ebuf is a string
we can store any error messages within (as we did above with errbuf).
The function returns our session handler.

To demonstrate, consider this code snippet:

         #include <pcap.h>
         ...
         pcap_t *handle;

         handle = pcap_open_live(somedev, BUFSIZ, 1, 1000, errbuf);
         if (handle == NULL) {
             fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't open device %s: %s\n", somedev, errbuf);
             return(2);
         }

This code fragment opens the device stored in the strong "somedev",
tells it to read however many bytes are specified in BUFSIZ (which is
defined in pcap.h). We are telling it to put the device into promiscuous
mode, to sniff until an error occurs, and if there is an error, store it
in the string errbuf; it uses that string to print an error message.

A note about promiscuous vs. non-promiscuous sniffing: The two
techniques are very different in style. In standard, non-promiscuous
sniffing, a host is sniffing only traffic that is directly related to
it. Only traffic to, from, or routed through the host will be picked up
by the sniffer. Promiscuous mode, on the other hand, sniffs all traffic
on the wire. In a non-switched environment, this could be all network
traffic. The obvious advantage to this is that it provides more packets
for sniffing, which may or may not be helpful depending on the reason
you are sniffing the network. However, there are regressions.
Promiscuous mode sniffing is detectable; a host can test with strong
reliability to determine if another host is doing promiscuous sniffing.
Second, it only works in a non-switched environment (such as a hub, or a
switch that is being ARP flooded). Third, on high traffic networks, the
host can become quite taxed for system resources.

Not all devices provide the same type of link-layer headers in the
packets you read. Ethernet devices, and some non-Ethernet devices, might
provide Ethernet headers, but other device types, such as loopback
devices in BSD and OS X, PPP interfaces, and Wi-Fi interfaces when
capturing in monitor mode, don't.

You need to determine the type of link-layer headers the device
provides, and use that type when processing the packet contents. The
pcap\_datalink() routine returns a value indicating the type of
link-layer headers; see [the list of link-layer header type
values](linktypes.html). The values it returns are the `DLT_` values in
that list.

If your program doesn't support the link-layer header type provided by
the device, it has to give up; this would be done with code such as

        if (pcap_datalink(handle) != DLT_EN10MB) {
            fprintf(stderr, "Device %s doesn't provide Ethernet headers - not supported\n", somedev);
            return(2);
        }

which fails if the device doesn't supply Ethernet headers. This would be
appropriate for the code below, as it assumes Ethernet headers.

Filtering traffic
-----------------

Often times our sniffer may only be interested in specific traffic. For
instance, there may be times when all we want is to sniff on port 23
(telnet) in search of passwords. Or perhaps we want to highjack a file
being sent over port 21 (FTP). Maybe we only want DNS traffic (port 53
UDP). Whatever the case, rarely do we just want to blindly sniff *all*
network traffic. Enter pcap\_compile() and pcap\_setfilter().

The process is quite simple. After we have already called
pcap\_open\_live() and have a working sniffing session, we can apply our
filter. Why not just use our own if/else if statements? Two reasons.
First, pcap's filter is far more efficient, because it does it directly
with the BPF filter; we eliminate numerous steps by having the BPF
driver do it directly. Second, this is a *lot* easier :)

Before applying our filter, we must "compile" it. The filter expression
is kept in a regular string (char array). The syntax is documented quite
well in the man page for tcpdump; I leave you to read it on your own.
However, we will use simple test expressions, so perhaps you are sharp
enough to figure it out from my examples.

To compile the program we call pcap\_compile(). The prototype defines it
as:

        int pcap_compile(pcap_t *p, struct bpf_program *fp, char *str, int optimize, 
            bpf_u_int32 netmask)

The first argument is our session handle (pcap\_t \*handle in our
previous example). Following that is a reference to the place we will
store the compiled version of our filter. Then comes the expression
itself, in regular string format. Next is an integer that decides if the
expression should be "optimized" or not (0 is false, 1 is true. Standard
stuff.) Finally, we must specify the network mask of the network the
filter applies to. The function returns -1 on failure; all other values
imply success.

After the expression has been compiled, it is time to apply it. Enter
pcap\_setfilter(). Following our format of explaining pcap, we shall
look at the pcap\_setfilter() prototype:

        int pcap_setfilter(pcap_t *p, struct bpf_program *fp)

This is very straightforward. The first argument is our session handler,
the second is a reference to the compiled version of the expression
(presumably the same variable as the second argument to
pcap\_compile()).

Perhaps another code sample would help to better understand:

         #include <pcap.h>
         ...
         pcap_t *handle;        /* Session handle */
         char dev[] = "rl0";      /* Device to sniff on */
         char errbuf[PCAP_ERRBUF_SIZE]; /* Error string */
         struct bpf_program fp;     /* The compiled filter expression */
         char filter_exp[] = "port 23";   /* The filter expression */
         bpf_u_int32 mask;      /* The netmask of our sniffing device */
         bpf_u_int32 net;       /* The IP of our sniffing device */

         if (pcap_lookupnet(dev, &net, &mask, errbuf) == -1) {
             fprintf(stderr, "Can't get netmask for device %s\n", dev);
             net = 0;
             mask = 0;
         }
         handle = pcap_open_live(dev, BUFSIZ, 1, 1000, errbuf);
         if (handle == NULL) {
             fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't open device %s: %s\n", somedev, errbuf);
             return(2);
         }
         if (pcap_compile(handle, &fp, filter_exp, 0, net) == -1) {
             fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't parse filter %s: %s\n", filter_exp, pcap_geterr(handle));
             return(2);
         }
         if (pcap_setfilter(handle, &fp) == -1) {
             fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't install filter %s: %s\n", filter_exp, pcap_geterr(handle));
             return(2);
         }

This program preps the sniffer to sniff all traffic coming from or going
to port 23, in promiscuous mode, on the device rl0.

You may notice that the previous example contains a function that we
have not yet discussed. pcap\_lookupnet() is a function that, given the
name of a device, returns one of its IPv4 network numbers and
corresponding network mask (the network number is the IPv4 address ANDed
with the network mask, so it contains only the network part of the
address). This was essential because we needed to know the network mask
in order to apply the filter. This function is described in the
Miscellaneous section at the end of the document.

It has been my experience that this filter does not work across all
operating systems. In my test environment, I found that OpenBSD 2.9 with
a default kernel does support this type of filter, but FreeBSD 4.3 with
a default kernel does not. Your mileage may vary.

The actual sniffing
-------------------

At this point we have learned how to define a device, prepare it for
sniffing, and apply filters about what we should and should not sniff
for. Now it is time to actually capture some packets.

There are two main techniques for capturing packets. We can either
capture a single packet at a time, or we can enter a loop that waits for
*n* number of packets to be sniffed before being done. We will begin by
looking at how to capture a single packet, then look at methods of using
loops. For this we use pcap\_next().

The prototype for pcap\_next() is fairly simple:

        u_char *pcap_next(pcap_t *p, struct pcap_pkthdr *h)

The first argument is our session handler. The second argument is a
pointer to a structure that holds general information about the packet,
specifically the time in which it was sniffed, the length of this
packet, and the length of his specific portion (incase it is fragmented,
for example.) pcap\_next() returns a u\_char pointer to the packet that
is described by this structure. We'll discuss the technique for actually
reading the packet itself later.

Here is a simple demonstration of using pcap\_next() to sniff a packet.

         #include <pcap.h>
         #include <stdio.h>

         int main(int argc, char *argv[])
         {
            pcap_t *handle;         /* Session handle */
            char *dev;          /* The device to sniff on */
            char errbuf[PCAP_ERRBUF_SIZE];  /* Error string */
            struct bpf_program fp;      /* The compiled filter */
            char filter_exp[] = "port 23";    /* The filter expression */
            bpf_u_int32 mask;       /* Our netmask */
            bpf_u_int32 net;        /* Our IP */
            struct pcap_pkthdr header;  /* The header that pcap gives us */
            const u_char *packet;       /* The actual packet */

            /* Define the device */
            dev = pcap_lookupdev(errbuf);
            if (dev == NULL) {
                fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't find default device: %s\n", errbuf);
                return(2);
            }
            /* Find the properties for the device */
            if (pcap_lookupnet(dev, &net, &mask, errbuf) == -1) {
                fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't get netmask for device %s: %s\n", dev, errbuf);
                net = 0;
                mask = 0;
            }
            /* Open the session in promiscuous mode */
            handle = pcap_open_live(dev, BUFSIZ, 1, 1000, errbuf);
            if (handle == NULL) {
                fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't open device %s: %s\n", somedev, errbuf);
                return(2);
            }
            /* Compile and apply the filter */
            if (pcap_compile(handle, &fp, filter_exp, 0, net) == -1) {
                fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't parse filter %s: %s\n", filter_exp, pcap_geterr(handle));
                return(2);
            }
            if (pcap_setfilter(handle, &fp) == -1) {
                fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't install filter %s: %s\n", filter_exp, pcap_geterr(handle));
                return(2);
            }
            /* Grab a packet */
            packet = pcap_next(handle, &header);
            /* Print its length */
            printf("Jacked a packet with length of [%d]\n", header.len);
            /* And close the session */
            pcap_close(handle);
            return(0);
         }

This application sniffs on whatever device is returned by
pcap\_lookupdev() by putting it into promiscuous mode. It finds the
first packet to come across port 23 (telnet) and tells the user the size
of the packet (in bytes). Again, this program includes a new call,
pcap\_close(), which we will discuss later (although it really is quite
self explanatory).

The other technique we can use is more complicated, and probably more
useful. Few sniffers (if any) actually use pcap\_next(). More often than
not, they use pcap\_loop() or pcap\_dispatch() (which then themselves
use pcap\_loop()). To understand the use of these two functions, you
must understand the idea of a callback function.

Callback functions are not anything new, and are very common in many
API's. The concept behind a callback function is fairly simple. Suppose
I have a program that is waiting for an event of some sort. For the
purpose of this example, let's pretend that my program wants a user to
press a key on the keyboard. Every time they press a key, I want to call
a function which then will determine that to do. The function I am
utilizing is a callback function. Every time the user presses a key, my
program will call the callback function. Callbacks are used in pcap, but
instead of being called when a user presses a key, they are called when
pcap sniffs a packet. The two functions that one can use to define their
callback is pcap\_loop() and pcap\_dispatch(). pcap\_loop() and
pcap\_dispatch() are very similar in their usage of callbacks. Both of
them call a callback function every time a packet is sniffed that meets
our filter requirements (if any filter exists, of course. If not, then
*all* packets that are sniffed are sent to the callback.)

The prototype for pcap\_loop() is below:

        int pcap_loop(pcap_t *p, int cnt, pcap_handler callback, u_char *user)

The first argument is our session handle. Following that is an integer
that tells pcap\_loop() how many packets it should sniff for before
returning (a negative value means it should sniff until an error
occurs). The third argument is the name of the callback function (just
its identifier, no parentheses). The last argument is useful in some
applications, but many times is simply set as NULL. Suppose we have
arguments of our own that we wish to send to our callback function, in
addition to the arguments that pcap\_loop() sends. This is where we do
it. Obviously, you must typecast to a u\_char pointer to ensure the
results make it there correctly; as we will see later, pcap makes use of
some very interesting means of passing information in the form of a
u\_char pointer. After we show an example of how pcap does it, it should
be obvious how to do it here. If not, consult your local C reference
text, as an explanation of pointers is beyond the scope of this
document. pcap\_dispatch() is almost identical in usage. The only
difference between pcap\_dispatch() and pcap\_loop() is that
pcap\_dispatch() will only process the first batch of packets that it
receives from the system, while pcap\_loop() will continue processing
packets or batches of packets until the count of packets runs out. For a
more in depth discussion of their differences, see the pcap man page.

Before we can provide an example of using pcap\_loop(), we must examine
the format of our callback function. We cannot arbitrarily define our
callback's prototype; otherwise, pcap\_loop() would not know how to use
the function. So we use this format as the prototype for our callback
function:

        void got_packet(u_char *args, const struct pcap_pkthdr *header,
            const u_char *packet);

Let's examine this in more detail. First, you'll notice that the
function has a void return type. This is logical, because pcap\_loop()
wouldn't know how to handle a return value anyway. The first argument
corresponds to the last argument of pcap\_loop(). Whatever value is
passed as the last argument to pcap\_loop() is passed to the first
argument of our callback function every time the function is called. The
second argument is the pcap header, which contains information about
when the packet was sniffed, how large it is, etc. The pcap\_pkthdr
structure is defined in pcap.h as:

        struct pcap_pkthdr {
            struct timeval ts; /* time stamp */
            bpf_u_int32 caplen; /* length of portion present */
            bpf_u_int32 len; /* length this packet (off wire) */
        };

These values should be fairly self explanatory. The last argument is the
most interesting of them all, and the most confusing to the average
novice pcap programmer. It is another pointer to a u\_char, and it
points to the first byte of a chunk of data containing the entire
packet, as sniffed by pcap\_loop().

But how do you make use of this variable (named "packet" in our
prototype)? A packet contains many attributes, so as you can imagine, it
is not really a string, but actually a collection of structures (for
instance, a TCP/IP packet would have an Ethernet header, an IP header, a
TCP header, and lastly, the packet's payload). This u\_char pointer
points to the serialized version of these structures. To make any use of
it, we must do some interesting typecasting.

First, we must have the actual structures define before we can typecast
to them. The following are the structure definitions that I use to
describe a TCP/IP packet over Ethernet.

    /* Ethernet addresses are 6 bytes */
    #define ETHER_ADDR_LEN  6

        /* Ethernet header */
        struct sniff_ethernet {
            u_char ether_dhost[ETHER_ADDR_LEN]; /* Destination host address */
            u_char ether_shost[ETHER_ADDR_LEN]; /* Source host address */
            u_short ether_type; /* IP? ARP? RARP? etc */
        };

        /* IP header */
        struct sniff_ip {
            u_char ip_vhl;      /* version << 4 | header length >> 2 */
            u_char ip_tos;      /* type of service */
            u_short ip_len;     /* total length */
            u_short ip_id;      /* identification */
            u_short ip_off;     /* fragment offset field */
        #define IP_RF 0x8000        /* reserved fragment flag */
        #define IP_DF 0x4000        /* dont fragment flag */
        #define IP_MF 0x2000        /* more fragments flag */
        #define IP_OFFMASK 0x1fff   /* mask for fragmenting bits */
            u_char ip_ttl;      /* time to live */
            u_char ip_p;        /* protocol */
            u_short ip_sum;     /* checksum */
            struct in_addr ip_src,ip_dst; /* source and dest address */
        };
        #define IP_HL(ip)       (((ip)->ip_vhl) & 0x0f)
        #define IP_V(ip)        (((ip)->ip_vhl) >> 4)

        /* TCP header */
        typedef u_int tcp_seq;

        struct sniff_tcp {
            u_short th_sport;   /* source port */
            u_short th_dport;   /* destination port */
            tcp_seq th_seq;     /* sequence number */
            tcp_seq th_ack;     /* acknowledgement number */
            u_char th_offx2;    /* data offset, rsvd */
        #define TH_OFF(th)  (((th)->th_offx2 & 0xf0) >> 4)
            u_char th_flags;
        #define TH_FIN 0x01
        #define TH_SYN 0x02
        #define TH_RST 0x04
        #define TH_PUSH 0x08
        #define TH_ACK 0x10
        #define TH_URG 0x20
        #define TH_ECE 0x40
        #define TH_CWR 0x80
        #define TH_FLAGS (TH_FIN|TH_SYN|TH_RST|TH_ACK|TH_URG|TH_ECE|TH_CWR)
            u_short th_win;     /* window */
            u_short th_sum;     /* checksum */
            u_short th_urp;     /* urgent pointer */
    };

So how does all of this relate to pcap and our mysterious u\_char
pointer? Well, those structures define the headers that appear in the
data for the packet. So how can we break it apart? Be prepared to
witness one of the most practical uses of pointers (for all of those new
C programmers who insist that pointers are useless, I smite you).

Again, we're going to assume that we are dealing with a TCP/IP packet
over Ethernet. This same technique applies to any packet; the only
difference is the structure types that you actually use. So let's begin
by defining the variables and compile-time definitions we will need to
deconstruct the packet data.

    /* ethernet headers are always exactly 14 bytes */
    #define SIZE_ETHERNET 14

        const struct sniff_ethernet *ethernet; /* The ethernet header */
        const struct sniff_ip *ip; /* The IP header */
        const struct sniff_tcp *tcp; /* The TCP header */
        const char *payload; /* Packet payload */

        u_int size_ip;
        u_int size_tcp;

And now we do our magical typecasting:

        ethernet = (struct sniff_ethernet*)(packet);
        ip = (struct sniff_ip*)(packet + SIZE_ETHERNET);
        size_ip = IP_HL(ip)*4;
        if (size_ip < 20) {
            printf("   * Invalid IP header length: %u bytes\n", size_ip);
            return;
        }
        tcp = (struct sniff_tcp*)(packet + SIZE_ETHERNET + size_ip);
        size_tcp = TH_OFF(tcp)*4;
        if (size_tcp < 20) {
            printf("   * Invalid TCP header length: %u bytes\n", size_tcp);
            return;
        }
        payload = (u_char *)(packet + SIZE_ETHERNET + size_ip + size_tcp);

How does this work? Consider the layout of the packet data in memory.
The u\_char pointer is really just a variable containing an address in
memory. That's what a pointer is; it points to a location in memory.

For the sake of simplicity, we'll say that the address this pointer is
set to is the value X. Well, if our three structures are just sitting in
line, the first of them (sniff\_ethernet) being located in memory at the
address X, then we can easily find the address of the structure after
it; that address is X plus the length of the Ethernet header, which is
14, or SIZE\_ETHERNET.

Similarly if we have the address of that header, the address of the
structure after it is the address of that header plus the length of that
header. The IP header, unlike the Ethernet header, does **not** have a
fixed length; its length is given, as a count of 4-byte words, by the
header length field of the IP header. As it's a count of 4-byte words,
it must be multiplied by 4 to give the size in bytes. The minimum length
of that header is 20 bytes.

The TCP header also has a variable length; its length is given, as a
number of 4-byte words, by the "data offset" field of the TCP header,
and its minimum length is also 20 bytes.

So let's make a chart:

  ----------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------
  **Variable**      **Location (in bytes)**
  sniff\_ethernet   X
  sniff\_ip         X + SIZE\_ETHERNET
  sniff\_tcp        X + SIZE\_ETHERNET + {IP header length}
  payload           X + SIZE\_ETHERNET + {IP header length} + {TCP header length}
  ----------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------

The sniff\_ethernet structure, being the first in line, is simply at
location X. sniff\_ip, who follows directly after sniff\_ethernet, is at
the location X, plus however much space the Ethernet header consumes (14
bytes, or SIZE\_ETHERNET). sniff\_tcp is after both sniff\_ip and
sniff\_ethernet, so it is location at X plus the sizes of the Ethernet
and IP headers (14 bytes, and 4 times the IP header length,
respectively). Lastly, the payload (which doesn't have a single
structure corresponding to it, as its contents depends on the protocol
being used atop TCP) is located after all of them.

So at this point, we know how to set our callback function, call it, and
find out the attributes about the packet that has been sniffed. It's now
the time you have been waiting for: writing a useful packet sniffer.
Because of the length of the source code, I'm not going to include it in
the body of this document. Simply download [sniffex.c](sniffex.c) and
try it out.

Wrapping Up
-----------

At this point you should be able to write a sniffer using pcap. You have
learned the basic concepts behind opening a pcap session, learning
general attributes about it, sniffing packets, applying filters, and
using callbacks. Now it's time to get out there and sniff those wires!

This document is Copyright 2002 Tim Carstens. All rights reserved.
Redistribution and use, with or without modification, are permitted
provided that the following conditions are met:

1.  Redistribution must retain the above copyright notice and this list
    of conditions.
2.  The name of Tim Carstens may not be used to endorse or promote
    products derived from this document without specific prior written
    permission.

/\* Insert 'wh00t' for the BSD license here \*/

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.tcpdump.org/pcap.htm
