[![The If
Works](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/81eec7f220df03d5b8cadf106a2c14c5/?s=100&d=mm)](https://blog.jcoglan.com/ "The If Works")

[The If Works](https://blog.jcoglan.com/ "The If Works")
========================================================

by James Coglan
---------------

Menu
====

[Skip to content](#content "Skip to content")

-   [About](https://blog.jcoglan.com/about/)

Translation from Haskell to JavaScript of selected portions of the best introduction to monads I’ve ever read
=============================================================================================================

(With apologies to [John Gruber](http://daringfireball.net/) and [A
Neighborhood of Infinity](http://blog.sigfpe.com/).)

I know, I know, the world does not need yet another introduction to
monads (or yet another article complaining that world does not need yet
another introduction to monads). So you’ll be glad to know this isn’t
one of those, in the sense that it’s not new. I thought I’d write it
because, first, monads are worth knowing about, and second, because I
want to get into how they relate to asynchronous programming and I want
a baseline in JavaScript to help explain things I might write later.
It’s also a valuable exercise in thinking in terms of types. If you’re
fine reading a little Haskell, I highly recommend you read the original
article, [You Could Have Invented Monads (And Maybe You Already
Have)](http://blog.sigfpe.com/2006/08/you-could-have-invented-monads-and.html).

First up, a little back story. Monads are more prevalent in Haskell
because it only allows pure functions, that is functions that do not
have side effects. Pure functions accept input as arguments and emit
output as return values, and that’s it. The languages I typically use
(Ruby and JavaScript) do not have this constraint, but it often turns
out to be a useful discipline to enforce yourself. The typical monad
introduction will tell you that monads are all about sneaking side
effects into this model so you can do I/O, but that’s just one
application. Monads are really about composing functions, as we’ll see.

Let’s consider an example. Suppose you have a function for finding the
sine of a number, which in JavaScript would be a simple wrapper around
the `Math` library:

    var sine = function(x) { return Math.sin(x) };

And you have another function for taking the cube of a number:

    var cube = function(x) { return x * x * x };

These functions take one number as input and return one number as
output, making them composable: you can use the output of one as the
input to the next:

    var sineCubed = cube(sine(x));

Let’s create a function to encapsulate function composition. This takes
two functions `f` and `g` and returns another function that computes
`f(g(x))`.

    var compose = function(f, g) {
      return function(x) {
        return f(g(x));
      };
    };

    var sineOfCube = compose(sine, cube);
    var y = sineOfCube(x);

Next we decide that we need to debug these functions, and we want to log
the fact that they have been called. We might do this like so:

    var cube = function(x) {
      console.log('cube was called.');
      return x * x * x;
    };

But we’re not allowed to do this in a system that only allows pure
functions: `console.log()` is neither an argument nor a return value of
the function, it is a side effect. If we want to capture this logging
information, it must form part of the return value. Let’s modify our
functions to return a pair of values: the result, and some debugging
information:

    var sine = function(x) {
      return [Math.sin(x), 'sine was called.'];
    };

    var cube = function(x) {
      return [x * x * x, 'cube was called.'];
    };

But we now find, to our horror, that these functions don’t compose:

    cube(3) // -> [27, 'cube was called.']
    compose(sine, cube)(3) // -> [NaN, 'sine was called.']

This is broken in two ways: `sine` is trying to calculate the sine of an
array, which results in `NaN`, and we’re losing the debugging
information from the call to `cube`. We’d expect the composition of
these functions to return the sine of the cube of `x`, and a string
stating that both `cube` and `sine` were called:

    compose(sine, cube)(3)
    // -> [0.956, 'cube was called.sine was called.']

A simple composition won’t work here because the return type of `cube`
(an array) is not the same as the argument type to `sine` (a number). A
little more glue is required. We could write a function to compose these
‘debuggable’ functions: it would break up the return values of each
function and stitch them back together in a meaningful way:

    var composeDebuggable = function(f, g) {
      return function(x) {
        var gx = g(x),      // e.g. cube(3) -> [27, 'cube was called.']
            y  = gx[0],     //                 27
            s  = gx[1],     //                 'cube was called.'
            fy = f(y),      //     sine(27) -> [0.956, 'sine was called.']
            z  = fy[0],     //                 0.956
            t  = fy[1];     //                 'sine was called.'
        
        return [z, s + t];
      };
    };

    composeDebuggable(sine, cube)(3)
    // -> [0.956, 'cube was called.sine was called.']

We’ve composed two functions that take a number and return a
number+string pair, and created another function with the same
signature, meaning it can be composed further with other debuggable
functions.

To simplify things, I’m going to need to borrow some Haskell notation.
The following type signature says that the function `cube` accepts a
number and returns a tuple containing a number and a string:

    cube :: Number -> (Number,String)

This is the signature that all our debuggable functions and their
compositions have. Our original functions had the simpler signature
`Number -> Number`; the symmetry of the argument and return types is
what makes these functions composable. Rather than writing customized
composition logic for our debuggable functions, what if we could simply
convert them such that their signature was:

    cube :: (Number,String) -> (Number,String)

We could then use our original `compose` function for glueing them
together. We could do this conversion by hand, and rewrite the source
for `cube` and `sine` to accept `(Number,String)` instead of just
`Number` but this doesn’t scale, and you end up writing the same
boilerplate in all your functions. Far better to let each function just
do its job, and provide one tool to coerce the functions into the
desired format. We’ll call this tool `bind`, and its job is to take a
`Number -> (Number,String)` function and return a
`(Number,String) -> (Number,String)` function.

    var bind = function(f) {
      return function(tuple) {
        var x  = tuple[0],
            s  = tuple[1],
            fx = f(x),
            y  = fx[0],
            t  = fx[1];
        
        return [y, s + t];
      };
    };

We can use this to convert our functions to have composable signatures,
and then compose the results.

    var f = compose(bind(sine), bind(cube));
    f([3, '']) // -> [0.956, 'cube was called.sine was called.']

But now all the functions we’re working with take `(Number,String)` as
their argument, and we’d much rather just pass a `Number`. As well as
converting functions, we need a way of converting values to acceptable
types, that is we need the following function:

    unit :: Number -> (Number,String)

The role of `unit` is to take a value and *wrap* it in a basic container
that the functions we’re working with can consume. For our debuggable
functions, this just means pairing the number with a blank string:

    // unit :: Number -> (Number,String)
    var unit = function(x) { return [x, ''] };

    var f = compose(bind(sine), bind(cube));
    f(unit(3)) // -> [0.956, 'cube was called.sine was called.']

    // or ...
    compose(f, unit)(3) // -> [0.956, 'cube was called.sine was called.']

This `unit` function also lets us convert any function into a debuggable
one, by converting its return value into an acceptable input for
debuggable functions:

    // round :: Number -> Number
    var round = function(x) { return Math.round(x) };

    // roundDebug :: Number -> (Number,String)
    var roundDebug = function(x) { return unit(round(x)) };

Again, this type of conversion, from a ‘plain’ function to a debuggable
one, can be abstracted into a function we’ll call `lift`. The type
signature says that `lift` takes a function with signature
`Number -> Number` and returns a function with signature
`Number -> (Number,String)`

    // lift :: (Number -> Number) -> (Number -> (Number,String))
    var lift = function(f) {
      return function(x) {
        return unit(f(x));
      };
    };

    // or, more simply:
    var lift = function(f) { return compose(unit, f) };

Let’s try this out with our existing functions and see if it works:

    var round = function(x) { return Math.round(x) };

    var roundDebug = lift(round);

    var f = compose(bind(roundDebug), bind(sine));
    f(unit(27)) // -> [1, 'sine was called.']

We’ve discovered three important abstractions for glueing debuggable
functions together:

-   `lift`, which converts a ‘simple’ function into a debuggable
    function
-   `bind`, which converts a debuggable function into a composable form
-   `unit`, which converts a simple value into the format required for
    debugging, by placing it in a container

These abstractions (well, really just `bind` and `unit`), define a
monad. In the Haskell standard library it’s called the `Writer` monad.
It’s probably not clear what the generic parts of the pattern are yet,
so let’s take another example.

One problem you’ve likely dealt with many times is deciding whether a
function should accept a single item as input or a list of items. The
distinction is usually a matter of inserting a `for` loop around the
function body, and this is usually boilerplate. But it does have a
significant impact on how you are allowed to compose these functions.
For example, suppose you have a function whose job is to take one DOM
node and return all its children as an array; its function signature
says that it takes a single `HTMLElement` and returns an array of
`HTMLElement`s.

    // children :: HTMLElement -> [HTMLElement]
    var children = function(node) {
      var children = node.childNodes, ary = [];
      for (var i = 0, n = children.length; i < n; i++) {
        ary[i] = children[i];
      }
      return ary;
    };

    // e.g.
    var heading = document.getElementsByTagName('h3')[0];
    children(heading)
    // -> [
    //      "Translation from Haskell to JavaScript...",
    //      <span class=​"edit">​…​</span>​
    //    ]

Now suppose I want to find the `grandchildren` of the heading, that is
the children of the children of the heading. Intuitively, this seems
like a good definition:

    var grandchildren = compose(children, children)

But `children` does not have symmetric input and output types, so we
cannot compose it like this. If we were to write `grandchildren` by
hand, it might look like this:

    // grandchildren :: HTMLElement -> [HTMLElement]
    var grandchildren = function(node) {
      var output = [], childs = children(node);
      for (var i = 0, n = childs.length; i < n; i++) {
        output = output.concat(children(childs[i]));
      }
      return output;
    };

We simply find all the children of all the children of the input node,
and concatenate the resulting lists to produce one flat list of all the
grandchildren. But this is not a convenient way to write it, and in fact
contains a lot of boiler plate that results from the fact we’re working
with lists, not from the problem we’re trying to solve. We’d rather just
be able to compose two list-handling functions and be done with it.

Thinking back to our previous example, we need to take two steps to fix
this: provide a `bind` function to turn `children` into composable form,
and write a `unit` function to turn the initial input – the `heading` –
into an acceptable type.

The core of the problem here is that our function accepts one
`HTMLElement` and returns a list of them, therefore our conversions
should be concerned with turning one item into a list of items and vice
versa. The fact that the items are `HTMLElement`s is not important, and
in Haskell when the concrete type of something may very we use single
letters to take their place. `unit` take an item and returns a list
containing that item, and `bind` takes a ‘one-to-many’ function and
returns a ‘many-to-many’ function.

    // unit :: a -> [a]
    var unit = function(x) { return [x] };

    // bind :: (a -> [a]) -> ([a] -> [a])
    var bind = function(f) {
      return function(list) {
        var output = [];
        for (var i = 0, n = list.length; i < n; i++) {
          output = output.concat(f(list[i]));
        }
        return output;
      };
    };

We can now compose `children` as desired:

    var div = document.getElementsByTagName('div')[0];
    var grandchildren = compose(bind(children), bind(children));

    grandchildren(unit(div))
    // -> [<h1>…</h1>, <p>…</p>, ...]

We’ve just implemented what in Haskell is called the `List` monad, which
lets you compose functions that map a single item to a list of items.

So what is a monad? Well, it’s a design pattern. It says that whenever
you have a class of functions that accept one type of thing and return
another type of thing, there are two functions that can be applied
across this class to make them composable:

-   There is a `bind` function that transforms any function so that
    accepts the same type as it returns, making it composable
-   There is a `unit` function that wraps a value in the type accepted
    by the composable functions.

I should stress that this is very hand-waving imprecise definition that
ignores the mathematical foundations of monads, which I don’t pretend to
understand. But to someone doing the sort of programming I do, it’s a
very useful design pattern to be aware of because it helps you spot
accidental complexity: code that isn’t dealing directly with the problem
at hand, but which is dealing with glueing data types together. Being
able to spot and extract such boilerplate can radically improve the
clarity of your code.

—

If you've enjoyed this article, you might enjoy my recently published
book [JavaScript Testing Recipes](http://jstesting.jcoglan.com). It's
full of simple techniques for writing modular, maintainable JavaScript
apps in the browser and on the server.

Posted on [March 5,
2011](https://blog.jcoglan.com/2011/03/05/translation-from-haskell-to-javascript-of-selected-portions-of-the-best-introduction-to-monads-ive-ever-read/ "1:29 pm")
by [James
Coglan](https://blog.jcoglan.com/author/jcoglan/ "View all posts by James Coglan").
This entry was posted in
[Functional](https://blog.jcoglan.com/category/functional/ "View all posts in Functional"),
[JavaScript](https://blog.jcoglan.com/category/javascript/ "View all posts in JavaScript").
Bookmark the
[permalink](https://blog.jcoglan.com/2011/03/05/translation-from-haskell-to-javascript-of-selected-portions-of-the-best-introduction-to-monads-ive-ever-read/ "Permalink to Translation from Haskell to JavaScript of selected portions of the best introduction to monads I’ve ever read").

Post navigation
===============

[← JS.Class 3.0, or, how I suck at
shipping](https://blog.jcoglan.com/2011/02/28/js-class-3-0-or-how-i-suck-at-shipping/)

[Monad syntax for JavaScript
→](https://blog.jcoglan.com/2011/03/06/monad-syntax-for-javascript/)

[![image](/jstr.png)\
 Buy my book, *JavaScript Testing
Recipes*](http://jstesting.jcoglan.com)

[Proudly powered by WordPress](http://wordpress.org/) Theme: Publish by
[Konstantin Kovshenin](http://kovshenin.com/).

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://blog.jcoglan.com/2011/03/05/translation-from-haskell-to-javascript-of-selected-portions-of-the-best-introduction-to-monads-ive-ever-read/
