[The Blog of Tim Ferriss - Experiments in Lifestyle
Design](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/)

![Rotating
Images](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-content/themes/timferriss_bb-revised/images/random/header_3.jpg)

[![The Four Hour Chef:The Simple Path to Cooking Like a Pro, Learning
Anything, and Living the Good Life by Tim
Ferriss](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-content/themes/timferriss_bb-revised/images/tim-ferriss-4-hour-click-more.png)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0547884591/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=offsitoftimfe-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=0547884591 "Get The Four Hour Chef: The Simple Path to Cooking Like a Pro, Learning Anything, and Living the Good Life at Amazon.com")

-   [Home](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/)
-   [About](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/about/)
    -   [Tim Ferriss Bio](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/about/)
    -   [Causes](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/about/causes/)
    -   [Media Kit and
        Samples](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/media/)
    -   [Disclosure – The Full
        Monty](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/ftc-disclosure-blog/)
    -   [Privacy
        Policy](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/privacy-policy/)

-   [4HWW](#)
    -   [Overview](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/overview/)
    -   [Buzz and
        Reviews](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/buzz-and-reviews/)
    -   [Tools and
        Gear](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/4-hour-workweek-tools/)
    -   [Table of
        Contents](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/contents/)
    -   [Chapter Sample: Introduction – My
        Story](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/introduction/)
    -   [Chapter Sample: Outsourcing
        Life](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/outsourcing-life/)
    -   [FAQ](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/faq/)
    -   [1,000+
        Reviews](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0307465357?ie=UTF8&tag=offsitoftimfe-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0307465357)

-   [4HB](#)
    -   [Overview and Video
        Trailer](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/overview-the-4-hour-body/)
    -   [Tools and Gear](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/gear/)
    -   [Success Stories and
        Buzz](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/success-stories-the-4-hour-body/)
    -   [1,000+
        Reviews](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/030746363X/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=offsitoftimfe-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399369&creativeASIN=030746363X)

-   [4HC](#)
    -   [Overview and Video
        Trailer](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/overview-the-4-hour-chef/)
    -   [Tools and
        Gear](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/the-4-hour-chef-tools-and-resources/)
    -   [Success Stories and
        Buzz](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/success-stories-and-buzz-the-4-hour-chef/)
    -   [1,000+
        Reviews](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0547884591/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=offsitoftimfe-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=0547884591)

-   [Gear](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/gear/)
    -   [The Best of “The 4-Hour”
        Books](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/book-gear/)
    -   [My Quarterly
        Shipments](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/quarterly/)

-   [Resources](#)
    -   [Apps](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/apps/)
    -   [The 4-Hour Workweek Bonus
        Chapters](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/the-4-hour-workweek-bonus-chapters-and-materials/)
    -   [Forum (Read-Only)](http://fourhourworkweek.com/vBulletin/)
    -   [What’s Your Lifestyle
        Quotient?](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/lifestyle-quotient/)
    -   [Ideal Lifestyle
        Costing](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/lifestyle-costing/)
    -   [Expense
        Calculator](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/expense-calculator/)
    -   [The Truth – Stats and
        Research](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/the-truth/)

-   [Contact](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/contact/)
    -   [Contacts](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/contact/)
    -   [Jobs](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/jobs/)

[7 Reasons to
Subscribe](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/7-reasons-to-subscribe/)
Subscribe via: ( [Email](http://forms.aweber.com/form/21/1075244421.htm)
/ [RSS](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/feed/) )

[![The Four Hour Chef:The Simple Path to Cooking Like a Pro, Learning
Anything, and Living the Good Life by Tim
Ferriss](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-content/themes/timferriss_bb-revised/images/tim-ferriss-4-hour-click-more.png)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0547884591/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=offsitoftimfe-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=0547884591 "Get The Four Hour Chef: The Simple Path to Cooking Like a Pro, Learning Anything, and Living the Good Life at Amazon.com")

12 Rules for Learning Foreign Languages in Record Time — The Only Post You’ll Ever Need [103 Comments](#comment_list)
=====================================================================================================================

Written by [Tim
Ferriss](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/author/admin/ "Posts by Tim Ferriss")
Topics:
[Language](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/language/ "View all posts in Language")

![image](http://www.fluentin3months.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/wall.jpg)

### Preface by Tim Ferriss

I’ve written about how I learned to speak, read, and write Japanese,
Mandarin, and Spanish. I’ve also covered my experiments with German,
Indonesian, Arabic, Norwegian, Turkish, and perhaps a dozen others.

There are only few language learners who dazzle me, and [Benny
Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com/) is one of them.

This definitive guest post by Benny will teach you:

-   How to speak your target language *today.*
-   How to reach fluency and exceed it *within a few months.*
-   How to pass yourself off as a native speaker.
-   And finally, how to tackle *multiple*languages to become a
    “polyglot”—all within a few years, perhaps as little as 1-2.

It contains TONS of amazing resources I never even knew existed,
including the best free apps and websites for becoming fluent in record
time. Want to find a native speaker to help you for $5 per hour? Free
resources and memory tricks? It’s all here.

This is a post you all requested, so I hope you enjoy it!

### Enter Benny

You are either born with the language-learning gene, or you aren’t. Luck
of the draw, right? At least, that’s what most people believe.

I think you can stack the deck in your favor. Years ago, I was a
language learning dud. The worst in my German class in school, only able
to speak English into my twenties, and even after *six entire
months*living in Spain, I could barely muster up the courage to ask
where the bathroom was in Spanish.

But this is about the point when I had an epiphany, changed my approach,
and then succeeded not only in learning Spanish, but in getting a C2
(Mastery) diploma from the *Instituto Cervantes*, working as a
professional translator in the language, and even being interviewed on
the radio in Spanish to give travel tips. Since then, I moved on to
other languages, and I can now speak more than a dozen languages to
varying degrees between conversational and mastery.

It turns out, there is no language-learning gene, but there are tools
and tricks for faster learning…

As a “polyglot”—someone who speaks multiple languages—my world has
opened up. I have gained access to people and places that I never
otherwise could have reached. I’ve [made friends on a train in China
through Mandarin](http://www.fluentin3months.com/train/), [discussed
politics with a desert dweller in Egyptian
Arabic,](http://www.fluentin3months.com/siwa/) [discovered the wonders
of deaf culture through ASL](http://www.fluentin3months.com/gallaudet/),
invited the (female) president of Ireland to dance in Irish (Gaeilge)
and [talked about it on live Irish
radio](http://www.fluentin3months.com/irish-interview/), [interviewed
Peruvian fabric makers about how they work in
Quechua](http://www.fluentin3months.com/runasimi/), interpreted between
Hungarian and Portuguese at a social event… and well, had an extremely
interesting decade traveling the world.

Such wonderful experiences are well within the reach of many of you.

Since you may be starting from a similar position to where I was
(monolingual adult, checkered history with language learning, no idea
where to start), I’m going to outline the tips that worked best for me
as I went from zero to polyglot.

This very detailed post should give you everything you need to know.

So, let’s get started!

### \#1 – Learn the right words, the right way.

Starting a new language means learning new words. Lots of them.

Of course, many people cite a bad memory for learning new vocab, so they
quit before even getting started.

But–here’s the key–you absolutely do not need to know all the words of a
language to speak it (and in fact, you don’t know all the words of your
mother tongue either).

As Tim pointed out in his own post [on learning any language in 3
months](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2009/01/20/learning-language/),
you can take advantage of the Pareto principle here, and realize that
20% of the effort you spend on acquiring new vocab could ultimately give
you 80% comprehension in a language—for instance, in English *just 300
words make up 65% of all written material*. We use those words a
*lot,*and that’s the case in every other language as well.

You can find pre-made flash card “decks” of these most frequent words
(or words themed for a subject you are more likely to talk about) for
studying [on the Anki app](http://ankisrs.net/) (available for all
computer platforms and smartphones) that you can download instantly.
Good flashcard methods implement a spaced repetition system (SRS), which
Anki automates. This means that rather than go through the same list of
vocabulary in the same order every time, you see words at strategically
spaced intervals, [just before you would forget
them](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forgetting_curve).

Tim himself likes to use color-coded physical flashcards; some he
purchases [from
Vis-Ed](http://www.vis-ed.com/products/?s_category=Language), others he
makes himself. He showed me an example when I interviewed him about how
he learns languages in the below video.

Though this entire video can give you great insight into Tim’s language
learning approach, the part relevant to this point is at 27:40 ([full
transcript here](http://www.fluentin3months.com/4-hour/)).

)

### \#2 – Learn cognates: your friend in every single language.

Believe it or not, you already—*right now*—have a huge head start in
your target language. With language learning you always know at least
some words before you ever begin. Starting a language “from scratch” is
essentially impossible because of the vast amount of words you know
already through *cognates*.

Cognates are “true friends” of words you recognize from your native
language that mean the same thing in another language.

For instance, Romance languages like
[French](http://french.about.com/od/vocabulary/a/vraisamis.htm),
[Spanish](http://www.linguasorb.com/learnspanish/spanish-cognates),
Portuguese, Italian, and others have many words in common with English.
English initially “borrowed them” from the Norman conquest of England,
which lasted several hundreds of years. Action, nation, precipitation,
solution, frustration, tradition, communication, extinction, and
**thousands of other** -tion words are spelled exactly the same in
French, and you can quickly get used to the different pronunciation.
Change that -tion to a -ción and you have the same words in Spanish.
Italian is -zione and Portuguese is -ção.

Many languages also have words that share a common (Greek/Latin or
other) root, which can be spelled slightly differently, but that you’d
have to try hard *not*to recognize, such as exemple, hélicoptère (Fr),
porto, capitano (Italian) astronomía, and Saturno (Spanish). [German
goes a step further and has many words from English’s past that it
shares.](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Transwiki:List_of_German_cognates_with_English)

To find common words with the language you are learning, simply search
for “[language name] cognates” or “[language name] English loan words”
to see words they borrowed from us, and finally “[language name] words
in English” to see words we borrowed from them.

That’s all well and good for European languages, but what about more
distant ones?

Well, it turns out that even languages as different as Japanese can have
heaps of very familiar vocabulary. To show you what I mean, have a
listen to this song (to the tune of Animaniac’s “Nations of the World”),
which is sung entirely in Japanese, and yet you should understand pretty
much everything that I and the other Japanese learners are singing:

)

This is because many languages simply borrow English words and integrate
them into the new language with altered pronunciation or stress.

So to make my life easy when I start learning a language, one of the
first word lists I try to consume is a list of “cognates,” or “English
loan words,” which can be found quickly for pretty much any language.

### \#3 – Interact in your language daily without traveling.

Another reason (or excuse, depending on how you look at it) people cite
for not learning languages is that they can’t visit a country where it’s
a native language. No time, no money, etc.

Take it from me—there is nothing “in the air” in another country that
will magically make you able to speak their language. I’ve done a lot of
experiments to prove this (e.g. learning Arabic while living in Brazil).

I’ve met countless expats who lived abroad for *years*without learning
the local language. Living abroad and being immersed is *not*the same
thing. If you need to hear and use a language consistently to be
immersed, can’t *virtual*immersion be just as effective? Of course.
Technology makes it possible for immersion to come to you, and you don’t
even have to buy a plane ticket.

To *hear*the language consistently spoken, you can check out
[TuneIn.com](http://TuneIn.com/) for a vast selection of live-streamed
radio from your country of choice. The app (free) also has a list of
streamed radio stations ordered by language.

To *watch*the language consistently, see [what’s trending on Youtube in
that country right now.](http://www.youtube.com/trendsdashboard) Go to
that country’s equivalent URL for Amazon or Ebay (amazon.es, amazon.fr,
amazon.co.jp, etc.) and buy your favorite TV series dubbed in that
language, or get a local equivalent by seeing what’s on the top charts.
You may be able to save shipping costs if you can find one locally that
includes dubbing in the appropriate language. Various news stations also
have plenty of video content online in specific languages, such as
[France24](http://www.france24.com/fr/), [Deutsche
Welle](http://www.dw.de/themen/s-9077), [CNN
Español](http://cnnespanol.cnn.com/), and many others.

To *read*the language consistently, in addition to the news sites listed
above, you can find cool blogs and other popular sites on [Alexa’s
ranking of top sites per
country](http://www.alexa.com/topsites/countries).

And if full-on immersion isn’t your thing yet, there’s even a [plugin
for Chrome](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FrEzKtjKVio) that eases you
into the language by translating *some parts*of the sites you normally
read in English, to sprinkle the odd word into your otherwise English
reading.

### \#4 – Skype today for daily spoken practice.

So you’ve been listening to, watching, and even reading in your target
language—and all in the comfort of your own home. Now it’s time for the
big one: **speaking it live with a native**.

One of my more controversial pieces of advice, but one that I absolutely
insist on when I advise beginners, is that you *must speak the language
right away* if your goals in the target language involve speaking it.

Most traditional approaches or language systems don’t work this way, and
I think that’s where they let their students down. I say, ***there are
seven days in a week and “some day” is not one of them****.*

Here’s what I suggest instead:

Use the pointers I’ve given above to learn some basic vocabulary, and be
aware of some words you already know. Do this for a few hours, and then
set up an exchange with a native speaker—someone who has spoken that
language their whole life. You only have to learn a little for your
first conversation, but if you use it immediately, you’ll see what’s
missing and can add on from there. You can’t study in isolation until
you are vaguely “ready” for interaction.

In those first few hours, I’d recommend learning some pleasantries such
as “Hello,” “Thank you,” “Could you repeat that?” or “I don’t
understand,” [many of which you will find listed out here for most
languages](http://www.omniglot.com/language/phrases/langs.htm#lang).

But wait—where do you find a native speaker if you aren’t in the country
that speaks that language?

No problem! Thousands of native speakers are ready and waiting for you
to talk to them right now. You can get private lessons for peanuts by
taking advantage of currency differences. My favorite site for finding
natives is [italki.com](http://italki.com) ([connect with my profile
here](http://www.italki.com/?ref=885695)), where I’ve gotten both
Chinese and Japanese one-on-one Skype-based lessons **for just $5 an
hour**.

If you still think you wouldn’t be ready on day one, then consider this:
starting on Skype allows you to ease yourself in gently by having
another window (or application, like Word) open during your
conversation, already loaded with key words that you can use for quick
reference until you internalize them. You can even reference Google
Translate or a [dictionary for that
language](http://www.fluentin3months.com/free-dictionaries/) while you
chat, so you can learn new words as you go, when you need them.

Is this “cheating”? No. The goal is to learn to be functional, not to
imitate old traditional methods. I’ve used the above shortcuts myself,
and after learning Polish **for just one hour**for a trip to Warsaw to
[speak at TEDx](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0x2_kWRB8-A) about
language learning, I was able to hold up a conversation (incredibly
basic as it was) in Polish for an entire half hour.

I consider that a win.

)

### \#5 – Save your money. The best resources are free.

Other than paying for the undivided attention of a native speaker, I
don’t see why you’d need to spend hundreds of dollars on anything in
language learning. [I’ve tried Rosetta Stone
myself](http://www.fluentin3months.com/rosetta-stone-review/) and wasn’t
impressed.

But there is great stuff out there. A wonderful and completely free
course that keeps getting better is
[**DuoLingo**](http://www.duolingo.com/)****- which I highly recommend
for its selection of European languages currently on offer, with more on
the way. To really get you started on the many options available to help
you learn your language without spending a penny, let me offer plenty of
other (good) alternatives:

-   The [Foreign Service
    Institutes](http://fsi-language-courses.org/Content.php)’ varied
    list of courses
-   The [Omniglot Intro to
    languages](http://www.omniglot.com/writing/languages.htm)
-   [BBC languages’](http://www.bbc.co.uk/languages/other/quickfix/)
    intro to almost 40 different languages
-   [About’s language specific posts](http://www.about.com/education/)
    that explain particular aspects of languages well

You really do have plenty of options when it comes to free resources, so
I suggest you try out several and see which ones work well for you. The
aforementioned italki is great for language exchanges and lessons, but
[My Language Exchange](http://www.mylanguageexchange.com/) and
[Interpals](http://www.interpals.net/) are two other options. You can
take it offline and see about language related meet-ups in your city
through [The Polyglot Club](http://polyglotclub.com/), or the meet-ups
pages on [Couchsurfing](http://couchsurfing.org/),
[meetup.com](http://meetup.com/), and
[Internations](http://internations.org/). These meet-ups are also great
opportunities to meet an international crowd of fellow language learning
enthusiasts, as well as native speakers of your target language, for
practice.

But wait, there’s more. You can get *further*completely free language
help on:

-   The huge database on [Forvo](http://www.forvo.com/), to hear any
    word or small expression in many languages read aloud by a native of
    the language
-   [Rhinospike](http://rhinospike.com/) to make requests of specific
    phrases you’d like to hear pronounced by a native speaker. If you
    can’t find something on either of these sites, [Google
    Translate](http://translate.google.com/) has a text-to-speech option
    for many languages.
-   [Lang 8](http://lang-8.com/) to receive free written corrections.

The possibilities for free practice are endless.

### \#6 – Realize that adults are actually better language learners than kids.

Now that you’re armed with a ton of resources to get started, let’s
tackle the biggest problem. Not grammar, not vocabulary, not a lack of
resources, but **handicapping misconceptions about your own learning
potential**.

The most common “I give up” misconception is: *I’m too old to become
fluent.*

I’m glad to be the bearer of *good*news and tell you that **research has
confirmed that adults can be better language learners than kids**. [This
study at the University of
Haifa](http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21128224.000-age-no-excuse-for-failing-to-learn-a-new-language.html)
has found that under the right circumstances, adults show an intuition
for unexplained grammar rules better than their younger counterparts.
[Note from Tim: This is corroborated by the book *In Other Words* and
work by Hakuta.]

Also, no study has *ever*shown any direct correlation between reduced
language acquisition skill and increased age. There is only a general
downward trend in language acquisition in adults, which is probably more
dependent on environmental factors that can be changed (e.g. long job
hours that crowd out study time). Something my friend Khatzumoto
([alljapaneseallthetime.com](http://www.alljapaneseallthetime.com/))
once said that I liked was, “Babies aren’t better language learners than
you; they just have no escape routes.”

As adults, the good news is that we can emulate the immersion
environment without having to travel, spend a lot of money, or revert
back to childhood.

### \#7 – Expand your vocabulary with mnemonics.

Rote repetition isn’t enough.

And while it’s true that repeated exposure sometimes burns a word into
your memory, it can be frustrating to forget a word that you’ve already
heard a dozen times.

For this, I suggest coming up with *mnemonics* about your target word,
which helps glue the word to your memory way more effectively.
Basically, you tell yourself a funny, silly, or otherwise memorable
story to associate with a particular word. You can come up with the
mnemonic yourself, but a wonderful (and *free*) resource that I highly
recommend is [memrise.com](http://www.memrise.com/).

For instance, let’s say you are learning Spanish and can’t seem to
remember that “caber” means “to fit,” no matter how many times you see
it. Why not come up with a clever association like the following one I
found on Memrise:

![image](http://static.memrise.com/uploads/mems/output/598745-130503142711.png)

This [caber -\> cab, bear -\> fitting a bear in a cab] association makes
remembering the word a cinch.

It may sound like a lengthy process, but try it a few times, and you’ll
quickly realize why it’s so effective. And you’ll only need to recall
this hook a couple of times, and then you can ditch it when the word
becomes a natural part of your ability to use the language quickly.

### \#8 – Embrace mistakes.

Over half of the planet speaks more than one language.

This means that monolingualism is a cultural, not a biological,
consequence. So when adults (at least in the English speaking world)
fail at language learning, it’s not because they don’t have the right
genes or other such nonsense. It’s because *the system they have used to
learn languages is broken*.

Traditional teaching methods treat language learning just like any other
academic subject, based on an approach that has barely changed since the
days when Charles Dickens was learning Latin. The differences between
your native language (L1) and your target language (L2) are presented as
vocabulary and grammar rules to memorize. The traditional idea: know
them “all” and you know the language. It seems logical enough, right?

The problem is that you can’t ever truly “learn” a language, you *get
used to it*. It’s not a thing that you know or don’t know; it’s a *means
of communication between human beings*. Languages should not be acquired
by rote alone—they need to be *used*.

The way you do this as a beginner is to use everything you *do*know with
emphasis on *communication* rather than on perfection. This is the
pivotal difference. Sure, you could wait until you are ready to say
“Excuse me kind sir, could you direct me to the nearest bathroom?” but
“Bathroom where?” actually conveys the same essential information, only
removing superfluous pleasantries. You will be forgiven for this
directness, because it’s always obvious that you are a learner.

Don’t worry about upsetting native speakers *for being so “bold” as to
speak to them in their own language.*

One of the best things you can do in the initial stages is *not* to try
to get everything perfect, but to *embrace making mistakes*. I go out of
my way to make at least 200 mistakes a day! This way I know I am truly
*using and practicing*the language.

[TIM: I actually view part of my role as that of comedian or court
jester--to make native speakers chuckle at my Tarzan speak. If you make
people smile, it will make you popular, which will make you enthusiastic
to continue.]

### \#9 – Create SMART goals.

Another failing of most learning approaches is a poorly defined
end-goal.

We tend to have New Year’s Resolutions along the lines of “Learn
Spanish,” but how do you know when you’ve succeeded? If this is your
goal, how can you know when you’ve reached it?

Vague end goals like this are endless pits (e.g. “I’m not ready yet,
because I haven’t learned the *entire*language”).

[S.M.A.R.T.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMART_criteria) goals on the
other hand are *Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant,*and
*Time-bound*.

To start developing your SMART goal in a language, I highly recommend
you become somewhat familiar with the [European Common
Framework](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_European_Framework_of_Reference_for_Languages)
that defines language levels. This framework provides you with a way of
setting specific language goals and measuring your own progress.

In brief, A means *beginner*, B means *intermediate,*and C means
*advanced*, and each level is broken up into *lower*(1) and *upper*(2)
categories. So an upper beginner speaker is A2, and a lower advanced
speaker is C1. As well as being *Specific,*these levels are absolutely
*Measurable*because officially recognized institutions can test you on
them and provide diplomas (no course enrollment necessary) in
[German](http://www.goethe.de/lrn/prj/pba/bes/enindex.htm),
[French](http://www.alliancefr.org/etudiants-individuels/diplomes-tests),
[Spanish](http://diplomas.cervantes.es/index.jsp),
[Irish](http://www.teg.ie/english/exam_levels.htm), and [each other
official European language](http://www.alte.org/membership). While the
same scale is not used, you can also get tested in a similar way in
[Chinese](http://www.china.org.cn/english/features/hsk/105146.htm) and
[Japanese](http://www.jlpt.jp/e/).

So what do you aim for? And what do words like “fluency” and “mastery”
mean on a practical level?

I’ve talked to many people to try to pinpoint the never-agreed-upon
understanding of “fluency,” and I’ve found that it tends to average out
around the B2 level (upper intermediate). This effectively means that
you have “social equivalency” with your native language, which means
that you can live in your target language in *social situations* in much
the same way that you would in your native language, such as casual
chats with friends in a bar, asking what people did over the weekend,
sharing your aspirations and relating to people.

Since we are being specific, it’s also important to point out that this
does *not*require that you can work professionally in a language (in my
case, as an engineer or public speaker, for instance). That would be
*mastery* level (generally C2).

Though I’ve reached the C2 stage myself in French, Spanish and am close
to it in other languages, realistically I only really need to be
socially equivalent in a language I want to communicate in. I don’t need
to work in other languages. It’s essential that you keep your priorities
clear to avoid frustration. Most of the time, just target B2.

To make your specific goal *Attainable*, you can break it down further.
For example, I’ve found that the fluency (B2) level can be achieved in a
matter of months, *as long as you are focused on the spoken aspect*.

In phonetic languages (like most European ones), you can actually learn
to read along with speaking, so you get this effectively for free. But
realistically, we tend to *write*emails and text messages—not essays—on
a day-to-day basis (unless you are a writer by trade, and you may not
have those goals with your L2). Focusing on speaking and listening (and
maybe reading) makes *fluency* in a few months much more realistic.

Finally, to make your project *Time-bound,*I highly recommend a short
end-point of a few months.

Keeping it a year or more away is far too distant, and your plans may as
well be unbound at that point. Three months has worked great for me, but
6 weeks or 4 months could be your ideal point. Pick a definite point in
the not too distant future (summer vacation, your birthday, when a
family member will visit), aim to reach your target by this time, and
work your ass off to make it happen.

To help you be smarter with your goals, make sure to track your progress
and use an app like *Lift* to track completing daily essential tasks.

You can join the [Lift plan for language learning that I wrote for their
users
here](https://lift.do/plans/452/learn-to-speak-a-foreign-language).

### \#10 – Jump from Conversational (B1) to Mastery (C2).

The way I reach spoken fluency quickly is to get a hell of a lot of
spoken practice.

From day one to day 90 (and beyond), I speak *at least an hour a day*in
my L2, and my study time is tailored around the spoken sessions to make
sure that my conversation is what’s improving—not just my “general
language skills” through some vague list of words I may never use.

So, for instance, I may start a session by asking what my native friend
or teacher did over the weekend, and tell them what I did. Then I will
share something that is on my mind lately and attempt to express my
opinion on it, or allow the native speaker to introduce a new topic.
It’s important to take an active role and make sure you are having
*varied*conversations. Have a list of topics you would like to discuss
and bring them up (your hobbies, hopes for the future, dislikes, what
you will do on your vacation etc.) and make sure the conversation is
constantly progressing.

Lots of practice and study to improve those spoken sessions tends to get
me to lower intermediate (B1) level, which means I can understand the
other person speaking to me fine as long as they are willing to speak
clearly and adjust to my level and mistakes. It’s a LOT of work, mind
you! On typical learning days [I can be filled with
frustration](http://www.fluentin3months.com/comfort/) or [feel like my
brain is melting](http://www.fluentin3months.com/pain/) when–in fact–I’m
truly making a lot of progress.

But the work is totally worth it when you have your first successful
conversation with a native speaker. You’ll be thrilled beyond belief.

To see what this B1 level looks like, check out these videos of me
chatting to a native in Arabic (in person with my italki teacher!), and
in Mandarin with my friend [Yangyang](http://yoyochinese.com/) about how
she got into working as a TV show host:

)

)

At this level, I still make plenty of mistakes *of course*, but they
don’t hinder communication too much.

But to get over that plateau of just “good enough,” this is the point
where I tend to return to academic material and grammar books, to tidy
up what I have. I find I understand the grammar much better once I’m
already speaking the language. This approach really works for me, but
there is no one best language-learning approach. For instance, Tim has
had great success by [grammatically deconstructing a language right from
the
start](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/11/07/how-to-learn-but-not-master-any-language-in-1-hour-plus-a-favor/).
Your approach will depend entirely on your personality.

After lots of exercises to tidy up my mistakes at the B1 level, I find
that I can break into B2.

At the B2 stage you can really have fun in the language! You can
socialize and have any typical conversation that you’d like.

To get into the mastery C1/C2 levels though, the requirements are very
different. You’ll have to start reading newspapers, technical blog
posts, or other articles that won’t exactly be “light reading.”

To get this high-level practice, I’ve subscribed to newspapers on my
Kindle that I try to read every day from various major news outlets
around the world. Here are the top newspapers in
[Europe](http://www.amazon.com/b/ref=amb_link_353518862_21?ie=UTF8&node=2399044011&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_s=left-1&pf_rd_r=180J298JT8NRHYDNCWJS&pf_rd_t=101&pf_rd_p=1628063482&pf_rd_i=165389011),
[South
America](http://www.amazon.com/b/ref=amb_link_353518862_23?ie=UTF8&node=2399046011&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_s=left-1&pf_rd_r=180J298JT8NRHYDNCWJS&pf_rd_t=101&pf_rd_p=1628063482&pf_rd_i=165389011)
and
[Asia](http://www.amazon.com/b/ref=amb_link_353518862_20?ie=UTF8&node=2399043011&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_s=left-1&pf_rd_r=180J298JT8NRHYDNCWJS&pf_rd_t=101&pf_rd_p=1628063482&pf_rd_i=165389011).
After reading up on various topics, I like to get an experienced
professional (and ideally pedantic) teacher to grill me on the topic, to
force me out of my comfort zone, and make sure I’m using *precisely the
right words*, rather than simply making myself understood.

To show you what a higher level looks like, here is a chat I had with my
Quebec Couchsurfer about the fascinating cultural and linguistic
differences between Quebec and France (I would have been at a C1 level
at this stage):

)

Reaching the C2 level can be extremely difficult.

For instance, [I sat a C2 exam in
German](http://www.fluentin3months.com/c2-exam-results-and-analysis/),
and managed to hold my ground for the oral component, when I had to talk
about *deforestation*for ten minutes, but I failed the exam on the
listening component, showing me that I needed to be focused and pay
attention to complicated radio interviews or podcasts at that level if I
wanted to pass the exam in future.

### \#11 – Learn to sound more native.

At C2, you are *as good as a native speaker* in how you can work and
interact in the language, but you may still have an accent and make the
odd mistake.

I have been **mistaken for a native speaker of my L2**several times (in
Spanish, French and Portuguese – *including when I was still at the
B2/fluent level*), and I can say that it’s a lot less related to your
language level, and more related to two other factors.

**First, your accent/intonation**

Accent is obvious; if you can’t [roll your
R](http://fluentin3months.com/roll-your-r/) in Spanish you will be
recognized as a foreigner instantly.

Your tongue muscles are *not*set in their ways forever, and you can
learn the very few new sounds that your L2 requires that you learn. Time
with a native, a good Youtube video explaining the sounds, and practice
for a few hours may be all that you need!

What is much more important, but often overlooked, is *intonation*—the
pitch, rise, fall, and stress of your words. When I was writing my book,
I interviewed fellow polyglot [Luca](http://www.thepolyglotdream.com/)
who is very effective in adapting a convincing accent in his target
languages. For this, intonation is pivotal.

Luca trains himself *from the very start*to mimic the musicality and
rhythm of a language’s natives by visualizing the sentences. For
instance, if you really listen to it, the word “France” sounds different
in “I want to go to France” (downward intonation) and “France is a
beautiful country (intonation raising upwards). When you repeat
sentences in your L2, you have to mimic the musicality of them.

My own French teacher pointed out a mistake I was making along these
same lines.

I was trying to raise my intonation before pauses, which is a feature of
French that occurs much more frequently than in English, but I was
overdoing it and applying it to the ends of sentences as well. This made
my sentences sound incomplete, and when my teacher trained me to stop
doing this, I was told that I sounded *way more French*.

You can make these changes by focusing on the sounds of a language
rather than just on the words.

Truly listen to and and mimic audio from natives, have them correct your
biggest mistakes and drill the mistakes out of you. I had [an accent
trainer](http://www.mimicmethod.com/) show me how this worked, and I
found out some fascinating differences between my own Irish accent and
American accents in the process! To see for yourself how the process
works, check out [the second half of this post with Soundcloud
samples](http://www.fluentin3months.com/a-accent/).

**Second, walk like an Egyptian**

The *second*factor that influences whether or not you could be confused
for a native speaker, involves working on your social and cultural
integration. This is often overlooked, but has made a world of
difference to me, even in my early stages of speaking several languages.

For instance, when I first arrived in Egypt with lower intermediate
Egyptian Arabic, I was disheartened that most people would speak English
to me (in Cairo) before I even had a chance for my Arabic to shine. It’s
easy to say that I’m too white to ever be confused for an Egyptian, but
there’s more to it than that.

They took one look at me, saw how foreign I obviously was, and this
overshadowed what language I was actually speaking to them.

To get around this problem, I sat down at a busy pedestrian intersection
with a pen and paper and made a note of everything that made Egyptian
men about my age different from me. How they walked, how they used their
hands, the clothing they wore, their facial expressions, the volume
they’d speak at, how they’d groom themselves, and much more. I found
that I needed to let some stubble grow out, ditch my bright light
clothes for darker and heavy ones (despite the temperature), exchange my
trainers for dull black shoes, ditch my hat (I never saw anyone with
hats), walk much more confidently, and change my facial expressions.

The transformation was incredible! Every single person for the rest of
my time in Egypt would *start*speaking to me in Arabic, including in
touristy parts of town where they spoke excellent English and would be
well used to spotting tourists. This transformation allowed me to [walk
from the Nile to the
Pyramids](http://www.fluentin3months.com/cairo-walk/) without any hassle
from touts and make the experience all about the fascinating people I
met.

Try it yourself, and you’ll see what I mean—once you start paying
attention, the physical social differences will become easy to spot.

You can observe people directly, or watch videos of natives you’d like
to emulate from a target country. Really try to analyze *everything*that
someone of your age and gender is doing, and see if you can mimic it
next time you are speaking.

Imitation is, after all, the most sincere form of flattery!

### \#12 – Become a polyglot.

This post has been an extremely detailed look at starting off and trying
to reach mastery in a foreign language (and even passing yourself off as
a native of that country).

If your ultimate goal is to speak *multiple*languages, you can repeat
this process over multiple times, but I highly recommend you **focus**
on one language at a time until you reach at least the intermediate
level. Take each language one by one, until you reach a stage where you
know you can confidently use it. And then you may just be ready for the
next ones!

While you can do a lot in a few months, if you want to speak a language
for the rest of your life it requires constant practice, improvement,
and living your life through it as often as you can. But the good news
is — once you reach fluency in a language, it tends to stick with you
pretty well.

Also, keep in mind that while the tips in this article are an excellent
place to start, there is a huge community of “polyglots” online willing
to offer you their own encouragement as well. A bunch of us came
together in this remix, “Skype me Maybe.”

)

I share several more stories about these polyglots and dive into
*much*greater detail about how to learn languages in my newly released
book [*Fluent in 3
Months*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0062282697/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0062282697&linkCode=as2&tag=fluein3mont-20).
Grab a copy, or check out [my
site](http://www.fluentin3months.com/4hww-welcome/) for inspiration to
start your adventure in becoming fluent in a new language—or several.

Ganbatte!

\#\#\#

***Question of the Day:** What tools or approaches have you used for
learning languages? Please share in the comments!*

### Share this:

-   [Email](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?share=email "Click to email this to a friend")
-   [Facebook](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?share=facebook "Share on Facebook")
-   [Twitter](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")
-   [StumbleUpon](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?share=stumbleupon "Click to share on StumbleUpon")
-   

Posted on March 12th, 2014

#### Related & Recommended Posts

-   [How to Learn (But Not Master) Any Language in 1 Hour (Plus: A
    Favor)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/11/07/how-to-learn-but-not-master-any-language-in-1-hour-plus-a-favor/ "November 7, 2007")
-   [12 Rules for Learning Foreign Languages in Record Time — The Only
    Post You’ll Ever
    Need](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/ "March 12, 2014")
-   [How to Learn Any Language in 3
    Months](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2009/01/20/learning-language/ "January 20, 2009")
-   [Why Language Classes Don’t Work: How to Cut Classes and Double Your
    Learning Rate (Plus: Madrid
    Update)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2008/09/22/why-language-classes-dont-work-how-to-cut-classes-and-double-your-learning-rate-plus-madrid-update/ "September 22, 2008")
-   [How to Resurrect Your High School Spanish… or Any Language (Plus:
    Be on the CBS Early
    Show!)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/09/20/how-to-resurrect-your-high-school-spanish-or-any-language-plus-be-on-the-cbs-early-show/ "September 20, 2007")

### Leave a Comment or Question [Cancel reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/#respond)

**Comment Rules:** Remember what Fonzie was like? Cool. That’s how we’re
gonna be — cool. Critical is fine, but if you’re rude, we’ll delete your
stuff. **Please do not put your URL in the comment text** and **please
use your PERSONAL name or initials and not your business name**, as the
latter comes off like spam. Have fun and thanks for adding to the
conversation! (Thanks to [Brian
Oberkirch](http://www.brianoberkirch.com/ "Link to Brian Oberkich’s Website")
for the inspiration)

Name (required) \

Mail (will not be published) (required) \

Website\

Comment\

Notify me of followup comments via e-mail

Notify me of new posts by email.

### 103 Comments

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f0a42fbcbebd16bbb40deb3c2e96bc42?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Matt Frazier](http://www.nomeatathlete.com) — [March 12th, 2014,
    6:20 pm](#comment-263395)

    Benny is always the most outgoing guy at every conference I’ve seen
    him at … I think that (talking to EVERYONE, especially in a foreign
    country) helps a lot too!

    Congrats on this guest post, Benny.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263395#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 6:47 am](#comment-263561)

        Thanks Matt!
        ![:)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)
        I was actually quite shy when I was younger – language learning
        has made me more outgoing. I’d highly recommend it to people who
        want to get out of their shell!\
         Hope to run into you again asap!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263561#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f132a6e12363a8a6564bfd7b11f09c16?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Elias — [March 12th, 2014, 6:36 pm](#comment-263397)

    This is one of the best posts on this blog yet!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263397#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a242256626b737146339c43b5be2144f?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Aaron Posehn](http://www.chinease-ebook.com) — [March 12th, 2014,
    6:36 pm](#comment-263398)

    Benny is one of the many language learners that consistently wow me
    as well. He’s always so eager to get down the basics so that he can
    start to converse with others, and once he does, he seems to really
    soar upward and beyond. I’ve read many of his posts and taken much
    of his advice. A solid guy indeed when it comes to how to learn a
    foreign language.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263398#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 6:51 am](#comment-263564)

        Aw shucks, thanks Aaron! Yeah, people need to learn to have more
        fun with the beginner stage. It’s what opens up the entire
        language learning spectrum to us!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263564#respond)

        -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a242256626b737146339c43b5be2144f?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

            [Aaron Posehn](http://www.chinease-ebook.com) — [March 13th,
            2014, 8:49 am](#comment-263678)

            Thanks for the reply Benny, and I definitely agree! I need
            to constantly remind myself of this as well when I dive into
            new languages. Keep up the great work!

            [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263678#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/fb61a2cd95acfb0206bdcf9eb8ff911a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Jimmy Naraine](http://coolifedesign.com/) — [March 12th, 2014, 6:49
    pm](#comment-263401)

    Can’t believe my eyes. Today I watched your Skype interview with
    Benny and thought: “how cool would it be to see some of his stuff on
    the blog”.\
     Great stuff! What I like the most about Benny is that he is so
    genuine in his approach. I bet that this post is gonna get 700+
    comments
    ![:)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)\
     Thanks for posting guys!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263401#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 8:49 am](#comment-263679)

        700+ comments? Looks like I have my work cut out for me if I’m
        to keep up and try to reply to as many as I can
        ![;)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

        Glad you got to see me and Tim join forces again! I loved
        finding out during our Skype call how much we share in common in
        language learning philosophies.

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263679#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3f33d5340c5e9bb3c5a39a174e9ae0e8?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Chris Broholm](http://ActualFluency.com) — [March 12th, 2014, 7:00
    pm](#comment-263403)

    This is an amazing pillar article Benny, as a big fan of yours I was
    course already aware of many of the resources in the post, but
    writing them up like this not only links many of the aspects of
    language learning together, it also motivates me like crazy to keep
    working hard. Currently I’m on Russian (4th language) but aiming
    high like yourself!

    Congratulations on your book launch as well!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263403#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 8:51 am](#comment-263683)

        You know you are doing something right, when other experienced
        learners agree they would share the same links. The trick is
        using big platforms like Tim’s great blog to bring those tools
        to a wider audience. Yes, keep working hard!!

        And thanks for the book well wishes! Hopefully this blog post
        inspires a few more people to check it out!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263683#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/73442404397362c43063ad635da9c100?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Agne](http://theasiancinemablog.com/) — [March 12th, 2014, 7:37
    pm](#comment-263405)

    That is so awesome. At last my two people who inspired my language
    learning meet in one blog \^\^

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263405#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/272d5542eb02cde1d7d62b08d650b887?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    George — [March 12th, 2014, 7:55 pm](#comment-263408)

    Benny always has great insight on learning languages.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263408#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3e2b7e702354e2806e86b4c1dccb9787?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    King — [March 12th, 2014, 7:59 pm](#comment-263411)

    This was awesome- alot of these tricks helped me when I was
    relearning my native language (Bengali) and also with Japanese. I
    remember joking with my friends when they found out I was a polyglot
    that- “It’s not that big of a deal, all it means is that I’m now
    socially awkward in 4 languages”

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263411#respond)

    -   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/124828c6dd8ea9215fff4521b9b49b8e?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Beth Clark](http://www.thecitydweller.me) — [March 12th, 2014,
        9:13 pm](#comment-263435)

        Very handsome profile pic! Skype me maybe? Lol

        Beth

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263435#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b6312ac79b84896f52909f61517db7bb?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Chris W](http://donorschoose.org/mesa) — [March 12th, 2014, 8:10
    pm](#comment-263412)

    Hey Tim,

    This is a little off-topic but the email notices I get when there’s
    a new post from you always have “WordPress.com” as the sender name.
    Just thought I’d let you know in case that wasn’t your intention.

    Chris

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263412#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/65f439a43a12aa21e88a6970943b52da?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Tim Ferriss](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 2:30 am](#comment-263503)

        Huh… that’s weird. Thanks for the heads up!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263503#respond)

        -   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3d3f2e34e8f8d8ad0f56019a8f821d22?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

            [ninos youkhana](http://www.nninoss.com) — [March 13th,
            2014, 2:50 am](#comment-263509)

            Yes..I get all your emails like that…I thought you were
            supporting them or sponsering WordPress now.

            [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263509#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5440236261d32e9968a44404a8be85d0?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Zac](http://www.zenchamusic.com) — [March 12th, 2014, 8:19
    pm](#comment-263413)

    In one of the first sentences from benny, it says “In think” instead
    of “I think.” For someone talking about languages you might wanna
    fix it haha
    ![;)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263413#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 8:54 am](#comment-263686)

        Yep, we fixed that typo! As I say in this blog posts; I like to
        make at least 200 mistakes a day, and that’s not just in foreign
        languages
        ![:D](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_biggrin.gif)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263686#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3ec42960ccd7a069f29c5e32452cf0a8?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Antoine — [March 12th, 2014, 8:29 pm](#comment-263414)

    Great post Benny! I’m definitely looking to applying these steps and
    reading your book!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263414#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 8:55 am](#comment-263687)

        Enjoy the book! There’ll be free updates for life online.\
         Best of luck with your language learning project!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263687#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/eff8dd8ff3231f2ae160b73f9915df0a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Vinay](http://process.st) — [March 12th, 2014, 8:58
    pm](#comment-263420)

    damn, I’ve been living in Argentina for 11 months and just moved to
    Chile for start-up Chile and I wish I knew this earlier!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263420#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:01 am](#comment-263697)

        I was in Spain for 6 whole months speaking English all the time
        before I changed my approach, and look at me now! It’s never too
        late
        ![;)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

        The last line of my book is a Chinese proverb, relevant to your
        situation: “The best time to plant a tree is 10 years ago. The
        second best time is now”

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263697#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5cdf284db8fb93c53e7d01773c44eadb?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Gulnara — [March 12th, 2014, 9:09 pm](#comment-263426)

    In med school we rely on Anki a lot to retain lots of information
    that has to be regurgitated in 2-3 month period and then on the
    boards in a few years, so spaced repetition is a key to success.
    [http://www.supermemo.com](http://www.supermemo.com) is is great
    resource on that.\
     In learning the languages, I find it more difficult to understand
    the native speakers. When I came from Russia to the US 10 years ago,
    I could speak English perfectly but when people would talk back to
    me, I had no idea what they were saying. I find similar difficulties
    with Spanish. I speak ok, but again, I don’t always understand
    native people and to improve that, I need a lot more time to
    practice listening.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263426#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/124828c6dd8ea9215fff4521b9b49b8e?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Beth Clark](http://www.thecitydweller.me) — [March 12th, 2014, 9:11
    pm](#comment-263433)

    This post is fantastic. Thank you for all of this information and
    the links. Learning a new language has been a dangling carrot for me
    for several years now, and I appreciate you mentioning the SMART
    method to help me pull focus and be more results-oriented while
    still remembering to have FUN! Learning a language doesn’t have to
    be – and shouldn’t be – a chore, right?
    ![;)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263433#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e6ca2d1dd4885b185b4c370530a6590f?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Damien Elsing, Copywriter](http://www.damienelsing.com) — [March
    12th, 2014, 9:16 pm](#comment-263436)

    Tim, this is amazing — thank you! I have a friend learning Cantonese
    right now. Gonna forward him this as I am sure it will be a valuable
    resource.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263436#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:03 am](#comment-263699)

        This post on why Cantonese isn’t as hard as you think may also
        help your friend:
        [http://www.fluentin3months.com/cantonese/](http://www.fluentin3months.com/cantonese/)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263699#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1aa3cdd4a50adb551851d885e62d0b22?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Andres — [March 12th, 2014, 9:31 pm](#comment-263440)

    Amazing resource for learn languages, there are a LOT of goog
    resources and also they are FREE! I worked as a salesperson for an
    english online course and people sometimes doesn’t learn english in
    an effective way.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263440#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f2abb8c3584e02e3a34c41b63015b093?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Sean](http://www.familyrocketship.com) — [March 12th, 2014, 9:34
    pm](#comment-263441)

    The coming together of two worlds! Benny and Tim! Thank you for the
    great guest post Benny!

    Huge tip – “You will be forgiven for this directness, because it’s
    always obvious that you are a learner”. I’ve found sounding like a
    moron isn’t a big deal if the right intention is there. It seems
    people are more than happy to help you out when you’re trying. Thank
    you for the time you both put into this post!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263441#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/132a26515296407109b1a936e0579672?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Catrina — [March 12th, 2014, 9:37 pm](#comment-263443)

    This post was awesome and just what I’ve been looking for, thank you
    both!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263443#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:10 am](#comment-263704)

        Happy to help!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263704#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/32f58c352c51c91e763aa171928cf43e?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Dani Blanchette](http://goingnomadic.com) — [March 12th, 2014, 9:47
    pm](#comment-263445)

    I am one of those people who struggle with language, and just assume
    I suck at it, but I love this article because it has so many ways to
    learn and is a total confidence booster. I’ve been trying to learn
    Spanish, because my husband is Colombian, and after almost 2 years
    living there my Spanish still sucks.

    I recently discovered Duolingo and love it. It’s like a video game
    so I get really involved with not ‘dying’ (losing all my hearts).
    But I’ve never heard of some of the other resources like Anki. I
    just downloaded it to my phone with some flashcards and love it.

    I totally put this article to post on my social media and bookmarked
    it. (I am aware how much that phrase sounds like a spam comment) but
    it’s true. It’s awesome to learn that someone else who thought they
    sucked at language and thought they just didn’t have the talent for
    them is more multilingual. Thanks for the confidence boost and great
    resources!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263445#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:11 am](#comment-263705)

        Doesn’t sound like spam at all! I definitely appreciate the
        share – let’s get more language learning encouragement out
        there!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263705#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b6312ac79b84896f52909f61517db7bb?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Chris W](http://donorschoose.org/mesa) — [March 12th, 2014, 10:14
    pm](#comment-263450)

    Along the lines of virtual immersion Benny talked about, one fun way
    for me to explore foreign languages has been singing along to songs
    in the target language. This can be done with or without the lyrics
    in front of you, or more advanced: Find the Karaoke version of the
    same song.

    The nice thing is, you really don’t need any background in the
    language at all, so you could start doing this immediately. It’s
    very enjoyable since with very little practice it’ll sound to you
    like you’re pronouncing words like a native, even if you don’t
    understand the lyrics.

    This concept is not limited to songs. Pick your favorite movie (one
    you’d watch over and over again without getting tired of it), and
    watch it in your target language. Perhaps you’ll enjoy it so much,
    you’ll become motivated to memorize certain lines or quotes.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263450#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/84a9e0c98162506003ae4a1f988d7a4b?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Mo — [March 12th, 2014, 10:30 pm](#comment-263452)

    Empathizing with Gulnara .. Took French for a while in grade
    school/college. Can speak it decently, but listening .. sometimes,
    can’t understand a word that’s being said to me (usually in person),
    other times, catching it perfectly (usually watching on TV).

    Tim, I challenge thee to speak Yoruba .. always impressed to see
    examples such as:
    [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hk1aPBazfjo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hk1aPBazfjo)
    |
    [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d40MFeN6HYM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d40MFeN6HYM)\
     … very heavy on intonation, a very sing-song-type language. One’s
    mindset has to switch to speak it right.

    In learning languages (for example, when listening to my parents
    speak Yoruba) I try to focus not just on vocab, but also …\
     (1) memorizing popular/useful go-to phrases\
     (2) transitions between concepts — always struggled with bridging
    my sentence parts smoothly (I guess it’s mostly prepositions)\
     (3) later on … verb-noun conjugation, to make it sound better

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263452#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/82e506cff9d471798af244b7fe8c6dad?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Nikky](http://www.stylishwalks.com/) — [March 12th, 2014, 10:32
    pm](#comment-263453)

    Loved reading this article. The video tutorials here are very
    informative as well. Its true that adults are actually better
    language learners than kids. But, when you are a kid you can be a
    quick learner as well
    ![;)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263453#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:15 am](#comment-263707)

        Absolutely! Both adults and kids have their own advantages.
        Adults need to be more pro-active, but can process things like
        grammar rules way better, and kids can absorb naturally quicker,
        since they don’t have any other language to fall back on.
        Although whether that is inherent to being a kid, or a
        consequence of having “no escape route” could be up for debate.

        But I’ve seen kids learn remarkably quickly, even at the age of
        6 starting a second language. I like it when ANYONE regardless
        of age learns a language
        ![;)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263707#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/59101e22fc497d84f7a5f904c4851d06?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Caspase — [March 12th, 2014, 10:43 pm](#comment-263454)

    I think its worth mentioning that people who already speak the
    language you are learning- especially native speakers- are OVERJOYED
    to help you out, anytime, anywhere. I am learning mandarin (inspired
    by 4 hour chef, although I’m still a beginner:A1), and I can’t tell
    you the amount of times I’ve sat down on the train next to a Chinese
    speaker, opened up my vocabulary sheets to practice, and they have
    (unsolicited) asked ‘oh, are you learning Chinese?’, and started
    helping me. Just being at a school or job or something similar with
    a few native speakers can instantly give you several casual tutors.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263454#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a2594167fde04eefdcb888500b345634?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Chris](http://cristivlad.com) — [March 12th, 2014, 11:02
    pm](#comment-263458)

    One way that many people here in Romania learned the English
    language was from TV. When you watch subtitled movies it is easy to
    become very good in a different language even if you don’t pay the
    effort.

    I personally like to listen to people speaking in Spanish in youtube
    videos right now, which I know it will help me become more familiar
    with the pronunciation in this language. This should be done when
    you’re already a good speaker in the targeted language.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263458#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d78b90dd2cd8508f0e842946e801ae46?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Daniel Aguirre — [March 12th, 2014, 11:16 pm](#comment-263460)

    so cool, definitively the best post in a while for me. BIG THANK YOU
    TIM AND BENNY
    ![:D](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_biggrin.gif)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263460#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7954a7d89e5379effe17723db8923fb4?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Damien Herst](http://Www.modernpickup.net) — [March 12th, 2014,
    11:22 pm](#comment-263462)

    This is great. Now I have to decide which to learn first, Spanish or
    Portuguese.

    Told myself I want to visit Brazil and possibly travel a bit more
    this year so learning a new language is key.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263462#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ef2563e49021f086e84137af56087753?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Rasmus Lindgren](http://RetireMyAss.com) — [March 12th, 2014, 11:48
    pm](#comment-263471)

    Awesome post Benny.

    Since we spend months in Thailand every year, I’ve really been
    wanting to learn the language but has been putting it off as too
    difficult (other than a few casual phrases that mostly have to do
    with ordering beer ;)).

    Hope to see you again sometime (doesn’t have to be an Indian place
    in Berlin though ;))\
     -Rasmus

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263471#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:17 am](#comment-263708)

        I’ll be back in Berlin in June. Maybe see you then!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263708#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c1a62341fc3e9abe8bc69f09608b663d?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Scott — [March 13th, 2014, 12:19 am](#comment-263477)

    OK, this was an interesting post with some really good advice, but
    number \#6 – Realize that adults are actually better language
    learners than kids – is just delusional. One of the most researched
    areas in second language acquisition is the critical/sensitive
    period for learning language. After a certain age, supposed to be
    around the beginning of puberty, children begin to lose the innate
    faculty to acquire syntax and phonology like a native. It is not
    something that we retain throughout our entire lives. It is
    practically impossible to learn a language to a native-like level
    after the critical period and it is almost never attested to. Even
    if you put in the hours and live in the country of the target
    language, you might be an excellent speaker but as I said, you won’t
    achieve native-like ability. And saying that adults are actually
    BETTER than children at learning language is like saying that adults
    are better than children at going through puberty, or children are
    better at going through menopause. It’s a biological endowment that
    we lose. For example, a child at age 5 will, more or less, have
    acquired all of the syntactic and phonetic structures in their L1.
    You average adult L2 learner after receiving the same number of
    hours of exposure won’t be even close.

    So I like the positive attitude that you have, but let’s not let it
    drive us to believe outright silliness. Referencing one article is
    not going to outweigh decades of peer-reviewed research that say the
    exact opposite of what you’re proposing

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263477#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c1a62341fc3e9abe8bc69f09608b663d?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        Scott — [March 13th, 2014, 12:43 am](#comment-263483)

        OK, the article that Benny referenced uses an experiment with
        children older than 8! And also, it was a low exposure
        environment and all they had to do was learn one new grammar
        rule. Yes, in this case then older children will learn faster
        than young children and adults will learn faster than both. A
        lot of research has also been done in acquisition in low
        exposure environments, say 2 hours or less per week, and older
        children and adults do outperform younger children. But increase
        the number of hours of exposure up to an immersion setting, and
        it’s not even a contest. Younger children will achieve close to
        mastery and adults will not.

        If Benny had written something like “adults are better language
        learners than children in situation where input is kept very low
        and constant” then that would be OK, but the line that children
        are better language learners than adults in general, is flat out
        wrong and misleading

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263483#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e021d2b518fe147f2c87a9afe16b8b1c?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Ola — [March 13th, 2014, 12:33 am](#comment-263480)

    As a native Polish speaker I must say that you are awesome. Thanks
    for the inspiration.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263480#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7a70d5561d18d6e6d35a298c9105ab08?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [jamie flexman](http://www.psycholocrazy.com) — [March 13th, 2014,
    2:05 am](#comment-263495)

    Great article, one of the most in depth ‘how to’ guides to get
    started I have seen.

    One thing Benny left out, is the website
    [http://www.lingq.com](http://www.lingq.com) which is designed to
    quickly build up your vocabulary and reading/listening skills.

    For proof of how quickly an adult can learn a language and sound
    ‘native’ check out the actress Noomi Rapace and how she learnt
    English in her twenties.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263495#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/65f439a43a12aa21e88a6970943b52da?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Tim Ferriss](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 2:32 am](#comment-263504)

        I love Noomi (or Naomi?) Rapace! Incredible actress!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263504#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7a70d5561d18d6e6d35a298c9105ab08?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [jamie flexman](http://www.psycholocrazy.com) — [March 13th, 2014,
    2:06 am](#comment-263496)

    Great article, one of the most in depth ‘how to’ guides to get
    started I have seen.

    One thing Benny left out, is the website ‘LingQ’ which is designed
    to quickly build up your vocabulary and reading/listening skills.

    For proof of how quickly an adult can learn a language and sound
    ‘native’ check out the actress Noomi Rapace and how she learnt
    English in her twenties.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263496#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c8b3772c4c10399c249ec96df63633c7?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        Duncan B — [March 13th, 2014, 3:05 am](#comment-263514)

        The main page of lingq espouses: “Learn like a child”.\
         Evidence highly contradicts this concept. Same goes for Rosetta
        Stone.

        I wouldn’t waste your time.

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263514#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ac00f34a0dd5e5d784365e23ddcb73d8?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        xyz — [March 13th, 2014, 4:09 am](#comment-263521)

        @jamie

        you can read a very very in depth review on his website
        ![:)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)\

        [http://www.fluentin3months.com/lingq-review/](http://www.fluentin3months.com/lingq-review/)

        ———

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263521#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/878752978823a5b7e51251dd87b88408?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [simon](http://socreativedigital.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 2:06
    am](#comment-263497)

    This can just at the right time as I am going to learn Hungarian in
    the very near future My wife is Hungarian and soon our new born girl
    will be speaking it too and I don’t want to get left out!

    I spent 9 months in classes and with private teachers learning in
    the tradition ‘school’ way and barely a few words stayed in my head.
    I thought being dyslexic meant I might not be able to learn it but I
    learnt English so I must be able to.

    So I’ve been watching my baby girl study how people use their mouths
    when they talk and I’ve started doing the same when people speak
    Hungarian. And now this post has given me a fabulous boost. Thank
    you.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263497#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1fae7c5e2e284895bbf0882da74e674e?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Caro chan](http://www.carochin.wordpress.com) — [March 13th, 2014,
    2:26 am](#comment-263500)

    Domou arigatou gozaimasu!!!

    Jaaaa neeee!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263500#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b35e0cbea07a94b045f0e4fd2f8a541d?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Symbiatch — [March 13th, 2014, 2:49 am](#comment-263507)

    These tips may work great on “bigger” languages, but not on all. For
    example, Google is almost useless in some languages (I’m learning
    Lithuanian and am Finnish native). For example, it thinks that
    birthday cakes have suppositories on them (candles), and computers
    can be laxative (stationary).

    Also there might not be that much information available, or the
    information is harder to find. How much of the internet information
    about learning languages is in English? A lot. And e.g. Lithuanian
    is much easier to learn via Finnish.

    So while great tips (and I should spend more time doing those
    things), it doesn’t always work that easily.

    (Just wondering how easily I’d learn to be good in Lithuanian if
    just by sitting in class for two months, 6 hours per week, got me
    able to converse with people about likes, dislikes, what we’ve done,
    where we’ve been and lived, what foods we like etc…)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263507#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/98dc119688bda74499a1b9fcb45c3799?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Stephan Raczak](http://www.biohacks.net) — [March 13th, 2014, 3:29
    am](#comment-263516)

    Having a Polish background, the video of Benny speaking Polish is
    just freaking impressive. Polish is considered one of the harder
    modern languages to learn.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263516#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/40304668f936b68c5a9a9c4434ae6911?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Georgina Allen — [March 13th, 2014, 3:29 am](#comment-263517)

    This is great! However that I have to add that rules 2 and 5 don’t
    work with Finnish, the language I’m currently learning. Especially
    number 2. The only words identical or similar in Finnish and English
    are ‘idea’ and ‘sauna’. Perhaps I should have chosen Spanish. . .

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263517#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:25 am](#comment-263709)

        I don’t know any Finnish, but it’s considered in the same
        language family as Hungarian and I found a bunch of common words
        there, even though it’s not related to Indo-European languages.
        You may find some of these words fit in Finnish too.

        Don’t forget that despite lack of direct linguistic
        relationships, Finnish is still definitely influenced by other
        European languages, through religious vocabulary that would have
        come via Latin over the ages for instance, as well as modern
        words related to technology that may be borrowed from English. I
        used a dictionary real quick and confirmed that “Internet” is
        the same in Finnish for instance.

        Here’s a list I compiled of familiar words in Hungarian:

        [http://www.fluentin3months.com/wp-content/downloads/Hungarian\_familiar\_words.pdf](http://www.fluentin3months.com/wp-content/downloads/Hungarian_familiar_words.pdf)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263709#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/93a5d05c0fad896e326bb8d6e88713f1?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Roger — [March 13th, 2014, 3:46 am](#comment-263518)

    As a Brazilian involved with the English language for 25 years now
    and having started teaching English after 2 years of studies, lots
    of reading and some internet interaction years later without ever
    visiting an English speaking country to date I can say that all
    those tips are invaluable. BUT my experience as a teacher showed and
    proved clearly to me that there are basically two conditions to
    learn or master a second language. They are Real Interest (my case)
    and Real Need. Without this two prerequisites osmosis is your only
    method to acquire a macaronic level in any language you decide to
    flert with.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263518#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/488888e4217191cf3e2fb8f994a84af8?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Aleks Salkin](http://alekssalkin.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 3:53
    am](#comment-263519)

    Benny, I took ample notes and am gonna overhaul what I’m doing right
    now. No joke, this was absolutely the best blog – hell, best
    ANYTHING – I’ve read on language learning. I’m really looking
    forward to putting this all to the test for learning Italian. I’m
    going to Italy in June and will gladly be a guinea pig for all the
    above methods and will let you know how I’ve fared.

    Thanks again, and if you ever find yourself in Israel, look me up
    and I’ll gladly show you around as much of the country as I can.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263519#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 9:27 am](#comment-263710)

        Will do! Israel has been on my travel list for a while.
        Hopefully after this year-long book tour I can finally check it
        out!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263710#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/72c2828d529f0e69de82d523c3e7aca4?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Sean Tessier](http://unrogue.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 4:22
    am](#comment-263525)

    Great breakdown Benny. Love that you emphasize speaking immediately
    over rote learning. Has served me well.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263525#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f97fbb1c7ea0f02367c58a0ba922013?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Ana P — [March 13th, 2014, 5:05 am](#comment-263532)

    So nice of you to mention the latin languages and forget the most
    latin of them all. Let’s see…French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, I
    wonder what’s missing. Oh, yeah, Romanian.

    Other than that, great article!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263532#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d16b4aa7b7a4ec2ff0dc04d03913fcc3?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Jon Kjaer Nielsen](http://happyways.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 5:17
    am](#comment-263535)

    Brilliant.\
     In school, it took me 5 year to learn German…. or, more accurately,
    it took me 5 year not learning German. Today I can usually order the
    food I want at a restaurant in Berlin, and I understand most of what
    the bartender says, but I otherwise feel quite helpless in
    expressing myself.

    Your techniques sound like the best approach for “rebooting” my
    skills, so I can get my schnitzel and not the verdammtes
    geschnitzeltes…

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263535#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/020480c93655b32667fbcc00067cabd1?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Dom Goddard — [March 13th, 2014, 5:29 am](#comment-263537)

    An excellent post. I am going to Oktoberfest in Munch this year so
    that should give me a good goal to aim for in being able to hold a
    conversation in German using this guide!

    Thank you Tim and Benny

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263537#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 7:00 am](#comment-263568)

        You have loads of time – make it a priority and you’ll progress
        really quickly. With a language like German I’d recommend
        focusing on speaking and only polishing your grammar when you
        are already at a conversational stage. So just for when you get
        started, don’t worry about noun genders and perfect word order –
        this will let you focus on learning words and phrases and you’ll
        have something to fill your conversation with. When you ARE
        having conversations, then you can tweak them later.\
         Viel Erfolg! (Wishing you lots of success!)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263568#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf41105ecd02b8e0ba79c122c92c97bb?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Dan Douglas](http://dandouglas.wordpress.com) — [March 13th, 2014,
    5:39 am](#comment-263539)

    Great article. Another great site I use is
    [http://www.linguee.com](http://www.linguee.com).\
     It allows you to search for the translation of words and phrases
    and provides results within context from millions of previously
    translated or bilingual texts.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263539#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/248cc88b28c87a6fbada58f8334797b8?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Marcos Garcia](http://www.aprenderlinguas.com.br/) — [March 13th,
    2014, 6:09 am](#comment-263547)

    This is a excellent post. I’m a big fan of Benny. I love learning
    languages and use a lot of his tips. Benny and Tim are two great
    inspirations for polyglots.

    Thank you both.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263547#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8b0f623b1b9ea7b2f6f68e5c0b5f6ada?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Roberto Gonzalez](http://none) — [March 13th, 2014, 6:11
    am](#comment-263548)

    This. . .spoken from a guy who has insulted America (and thus
    American) on multiple occasions, and never had the decency to
    apologize for thoughtless, ignorant comments.

    I am rather shocked you would publish anything from him. I lost a
    lot of respect for you Tim.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263548#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/febb7ccdcf09128a34354e884ef21946?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Toby](http://tobyschrapel.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 6:17
    am](#comment-263553)

    I had the exact same problem at school being taught German. Been
    learning Spanish on Duolingo for a few months now and it feels so
    good to be making progress with it.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263553#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2da50f1dc1637221d4b650784f3f8802?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Pierre Clouthier](http://progenygenealogy.com) — [March 13th, 2014,
    6:22 am](#comment-263555)

    I have a couple of additional suggestions.

    [1] Learn jokes in the foreign language. Nothing gives you
    satisfaction like ‘getting’ a joke in the language you are learning.
    You feel like you belong.

    [2] Go live in the foreign country whose language you are trying to
    learn. Nothing beats being immersed in the culture. I went from zero
    to teaching high school physics in Spanish in two months, while
    living in Bolivia and Peru.

    [3] If you are living in a country where bargaining is the norm, the
    ability to haggle proficiently and not be taken advantage of, is a
    powerful incentive to become fluent.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263555#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 7:41 am](#comment-263577)

        Thanks for the additions! This may surprise people, but after 11
        years of travelling the world, I actually don’t recommend moving
        to the country as a language-learning-tool any more. I used to
        do it (exclusively), but now I’ve found that it’s way more
        practical to learn it in advance, get some practice online and
        “hit the ground running” when you arrive to make your time in
        the country even more enjoyable.

        For some people being in the country is simply a fire under your
        ass that forces you to improve. This can be emulated through
        filling your calendar with 1-on-1 lessons, and having specific
        goals like reading a certain amount or watching so many hours of
        content in the language per week.

        I agree that “nothing beats being immersed in the culture”, but
        you can emulate that experience online, even if it’s not AS good
        as the real thing.

        The biggest problem is that there are so many expats who rely on
        the “something in the air in the country will help me learn the
        language” idea, that when they arrive and feel overwhelmed from
        not having done anything, they find other English speakers to
        hang out with “just while they settle in”, and nothing ever
        happens. I know this because it’s what happened to me when I
        first moved to Spain.

        There are others who are highly motivated who successfully
        embrace 100% immersion on arrival, but my money is always on
        learning in advance and using time in the country to improve on
        already acquired speaking skills.

        Bargaining and chats with taxi drivers are great practice for
        beginners though. Definitely agree there! It’s why I role-play
        such chats with my teachers via Skype
        ![;)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_wink.gif)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263577#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7bf306ada57db47547e9da39a415edf6?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [August](http://contraniche.blogspot.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 6:26
    am](#comment-263556)

    Movies/T.V. in your target language with target language subtitles
    on.\
     So, for instance, Spanish language movies with Spanish subtitles.
    Maybe you have to watch it once with English subtitles to get the
    point, but there is something about seeing the situation, the words
    spoken, and the words written that locks it all together. I wish I
    had time to do this more often.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263556#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 7:53 am](#comment-263578)

        Agreed! Another option is watching a show you already know with
        no subtitles at all. I eased myself into Spanish by watching
        “Los Simpson”, and since I knew the episode from memory, I could
        focus on hearing what they were saying. Then again enabling
        subtitles did help because European Spanish can be quite fast
        for beginner learners and it helped me see the words I was
        hearing.

        Activating subtitles in your mother tongue (English for
        instance) is a really bad idea on the other hand, since you can
        get distracted and only read that. Although you make a good
        point that you can use this in a separate watching session to
        help you understand better. I’d recommend watch 1 to be in the
        target language, watch 2 to be in your mother tongue and watch 3
        to be in the target language again. This is similar to the
        technique used by language learning podcasts, where session 2 is
        explained and translated to you, and then the last time it’s all
        so much clearer. Very motivating!

        Also, you can make the time. If right now you watch any TV at
        all in your mother tongue, you can sacrifice this for your
        language project. I’ve also made time while standing in lines or
        waiting for people or on public transport, to squeeze in more
        language studying.

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263578#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/71c77f6114096b3f0f9677732c40f3c7?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    99bonk — [March 13th, 2014, 6:46 am](#comment-263559)

    the information on learning to speak and listen is terrific, but
    what does one do about learning to read in languages which don’t use
    Roman fonts (Arabic, Japanese, etc)? Any comments about how to make
    it easier to learn to read these.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263559#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 7:58 am](#comment-263580)

        Each language with a non-Roman alphabet can be processed
        differently, but quickly. For phonetic languages with different
        scripts (Arabic, Russian, Greek, Thai, Korean) this post I wrote
        may help:\

        [http://www.fluentin3months.com/phonetic-script-can-be-learned-quickly/](http://www.fluentin3months.com/phonetic-script-can-be-learned-quickly/)\
         Using these techniques I could read Thai in a matter of hours.
        I did something similar for Arabic.

        Japanese is a mixed boat because it has three phonetic scripts
        (one of which is Romanized), so you learn “Kana” first to give
        you a huge boost in the language. Learning this alphabet and
        knowing it well helped me so much while in Japan.

        But with Japanese Kanji and Chinese Hanzi, you have a whole new
        major task to take on. A friend of mine wrote a post that makes
        it more manageable (about Kanji, but can be applied to Hanzi):\

        [http://www.fluentin3months.com/2k-kanji/](http://www.fluentin3months.com/2k-kanji/)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263580#respond)

        -   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/73442404397362c43063ad635da9c100?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

            [Agne](http://theasiancinemablog.com/) — [March 13th, 2014,
            9:04 am](#comment-263701)

            Benny, and how about Chinese? I find reading Chinese even
            harder than Japanese, as they do not have hiragana to
            identify where words end. Is there any trick you or Tim know
            to boost Chinese reading skills?

            [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263701#respond)

            -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

                [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March
                13th, 2014, 9:38 am](#comment-263713)

                When I travelled China for several months, I “cheated”
                and used the OCR in the app “Pleco”, which very
                efficiently renders Hanzi as pinyin, to help you read
                the menu. Even though I used it to reduce my workload,
                it actually has a flashcard system built into it, so I
                would see the same characters coming up that I genuinely
                needed and added them to be studied.

                That’s the thing with Chinese, yes there are lots of
                characters to learn, but learning some particular ones
                will give you way more mileage than others. The trick is
                to get enough exposure to the language to see which ones
                those are.

        -   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/73442404397362c43063ad635da9c100?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

            [Agne](http://theasiancinemablog.com/) — [March 13th, 2014,
            9:08 am](#comment-263703)

            Oh and great to know that Arabic and Thai scripts are fairly
            easy. They look so complicated. Both languages I want to
            learn too.

            [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263703#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6818c5346e0106c3fb6112e3471c25f1?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Semaj Richardson](http://livefluently.com) — [March 13th, 2014,
    6:50 am](#comment-263563)

    Wow! This is a highly in-depth article. I’m really into language
    learning and there were a lot of resources pointed out that I didn’t
    know about. I have to say that Benny is really good at what he does;
    this is a highly motivational and informational post, I really like
    it!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263563#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 7:59 am](#comment-263582)

        Thanks – glad you liked it!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263582#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3f7c37d2712fb44472513ccca2612a26?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Robin Turner](http://about.me/robinturner) — [March 13th, 2014,
    6:51 am](#comment-263565)

    As someone who’s been teaching a language for 25 years and learning
    languages for longer, I can say this articel is based on sound
    principles, though of course YMYV. recently I changed holiday plans
    from Paris to Rome, put learning French on one side (specifically,
    changed its Evernote tag from “Active Projects” to “Inactive
    Projects”!) and decided to see how much Italian I could learn in
    three weeks with very little free time to study. I used four
    methods, all recommended here and/or in 4HC.

    \1. Tim’s sentence table for deconstructing the language (This is an
    apple. It is John’s apple. the apple is red etc. etc.).\
     2. Duolingo, which is great fun and seems to work despite breaking
    every principle of language pedagogy, particularly the one of making
    target language meaningful. Some of the computer-generated sentences
    are so absurd you cannot possibly forget them, and who knows, one
    day I may need to say “I have a snake in my shoe” in Italian.\
     3. Anki, as mentioned above. I’d also used it before effectively to
    get some basic holiday Greek and learn the Greek alphabet.\
     4. The BBC’s La Mappa Misteriosa. This is like the opposite of
    Duolingo, in that it’s based on a video drama with very
    authentic-sounding Italian, meaning you aren’t expected to
    understand most of it, just the crucial bits, which of course is
    what you need to do in real life. It’s also shot POV and characters
    talk face-to-face with you, so you feel like you’re part of the
    action. there again, given my usual experience of POV graphics, I
    kept wanting to click on things to blow them up.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263565#respond)

    -   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3f7c37d2712fb44472513ccca2612a26?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Robin Turner](http://about.me/robinturner) — [March 13th, 2014,
        6:59 am](#comment-263567)

        Oops, trust an English teacher to have typos in his post.

        s/articel/article;\
         s/YMYV/YMMV;

        I blame my current learning project, which is touch-typing!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263567#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/312ade8f5df6410f0e8f9745a27b5119?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Carlos](http://CJMDC.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 7:38
    am](#comment-263575)

    Hi Tim,

    Longtime reader and fan, first time commenter.

    I saw that Uber recently launched in Panama City and I’m an ideal
    fit for the community manager role. I created Amo Panama (Love
    Panama) and leveraged my skills to grow small businesses, organize
    photowalks,, and strengthen a breast cancer awarness campaign in
    Panama!

    I know you’re an Uber investor and would appreciate you checking out
    my work!

    Saludos!

    Carlos

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263575#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/73442404397362c43063ad635da9c100?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Agne](http://theasiancinemablog.com/) — [March 13th, 2014, 9:53
    am](#comment-263717)

    Also, Benny, Tim – what do you think about InnovativeLanguages
    tools, like Chinese101, ThaiPod101 and others? I am learning
    Mandarin with their tools now, and I do enjoy the lessons (even
    though have to adjust some things, as Chinese in Taiwan is a bit
    different). Interested to hear what you have to say on them.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263717#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a242256626b737146339c43b5be2144f?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Aaron Posehn](http://www.chinease-ebook.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 10:22 am](#comment-263721)

        Hi Agne, noticed your comment here and thought I’d share a blog
        article that provides a run down of some of these similar types
        of tools. I haven’t used ChineseClass101 too much, but it seems
        good from the little bit I’ve used it.

        [http://howtolearnchinesewriting.com/resources-to-improve-your-chinese-in-2014/](http://howtolearnchinesewriting.com/resources-to-improve-your-chinese-in-2014/)

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263721#respond)

        -   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/73442404397362c43063ad635da9c100?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

            [Agne](http://theasiancinemablog.com/) — [March 13th, 2014,
            6:24 pm](#comment-263829)

            Thanks Aaron. Your website looks like exactly the recourse I
            need
            ![:)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)

            [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263829#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7361eb9e16e11dcf3c5810b60b4baa9d?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Ed Schultz](http://Zite) — [March 13th, 2014, 10:17
    am](#comment-263719)

    Thanks for the great tips, material, and site links. I want to learn
    Italian for a trip to Italy in 2015. After trying to learn French
    for a previous trip I was feeling a little defeated before even
    tackling Italian. Your post has inspired me and given me confidence.
    Now I’m excited to get started!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263719#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/571290f62dce4204b270ed3e5ea599fd?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    ncaaron — [March 13th, 2014, 10:18 am](#comment-263720)

    Benny,

    Great article, so much information to absorb. I was wondering if it
    is possible and would you recommend learning two languages at the
    same time?

    Best,

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263720#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/71c77f6114096b3f0f9677732c40f3c7?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    99bonk — [March 13th, 2014, 10:28 am](#comment-263723)

    I am receiving individual emails each containing one comment on the
    12 rules for learning language. I tried to unsubscribe but was
    unsuccessful. I want Tim’s blog posts but not all the comments.
    Help!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263723#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a0bcb87c5db2a51cfeff9cec8084e9c2?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Tunji — [March 13th, 2014, 11:37 am](#comment-263743)

    Thanks Benny.

    Loved the skype me maybe video. very uplifting.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263743#respond)

    -   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4ac83f83b0652aeee4fe06746f9ba12a?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

        [Benny Lewis](http://www.fluentin3months.com) — [March 13th,
        2014, 2:23 pm](#comment-263777)

        Glad you enjoyed it! It was a LOT of editing work, but I was so
        glad to collaborate with all those amazing people!

        [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263777#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/710caf735a68cd21db54e2ea9a065c28?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    STUART — [March 13th, 2014, 11:49 am](#comment-263745)

    I WANT TO \#YOLO ON DIFFERENT CONTINENTS IN DIFFERENT LANGUAGES!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263745#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/082c56f4472fec62a9e01c6f5f096edf?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Zsolt](http://zsoltbabocsai.org/) — [March 13th, 2014, 11:53
    am](#comment-263748)

    Benny,

    Great stuff as always.

    I’m not saying I knew all this, but I wasted a very long time trying
    to learn English the wrong way, and actually learnt it pretty well
    in a much shorter time the right way. So I get the idea.

    Where I fail is execution. I know what I should be doing, but I
    don’t.

    I’ve been traveling South America since last October and my Spanish
    is not better than someone’s who’s made an intensive effort for two
    weeks.

    I know I just need to make this my No. 1. priority, but working full
    time, trying to explore some of the places I travel through, trying
    to keep fit and so on it hasn’t been easy. These are just excuses if
    you look at it that way, but they feel very real.

    The little Spanish I do know I picked up listening to locals and
    trying to interact with them, which I thoroughly enjoy.

    Do you have any tips for me?

    Thanks,\
     Zsolt

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263748#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4a8bcfb755a55e983499125f96b54fcc?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Gustavo Orrego](http://tavodesigninglife.blogspot.com) — [March
    13th, 2014, 11:57 am](#comment-263749)

    Hi every body,

    Tim and Benny thanks for this too complete post about being a
    polyglot, I took note about all, it took me about 2 hours but ti
    worths them :).

    So one tool I use to learn a language, is the book “Aprenda un
    idioma en 7 dias” by Ramon C. I think that is a good book to start
    the language trip.

    Cheers!

    Tavo.\
     @tavoorrego (Tweeter.)

    .

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263749#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9257cd7877bf36e9b612ac3d9b6355ac?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    baa — [March 13th, 2014, 12:07 pm](#comment-263751)

    Loved this post and will certainly come back to it several times. I
    too like to first learn the flow of the language before learning any
    grammatical rules.

    DuoLingo is great as it gives you a sense of the language, so that
    after a time you find yourself hitting the right answer without much
    consideration. The “practice your weak skills” feature is
    particularly useful to me. I started with Italian and wonder if I
    will be able to read and understand a real book when I’ve finished
    the lessons.

    Forvo is great too. I should start adding pronunciations again.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263751#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f7e208050e8e82a80a72b67f8c65ea40?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Davidian](http://Www.bischool.com) — [March 13th, 2014, 1:34
    pm](#comment-263766)

    Great post.\
     As the director of an International School i have given this
    material to my ESL teachers. They will start using this information
    as soon as possible.

    Inspiring post. Thx again!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263766#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/27eee684b9c1edac6533b8d245eecd08?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Sergio Rodrigues — [March 13th, 2014, 4:53 pm](#comment-263810)

    Is it possible to learn a language from scratch just by reading and
    listening, with no previous knowledge of the grammar and structure
    of the target language?

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263810#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/563fb94f87bc7996dc68b8d412e8eeaf?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Pierre Lambert — [March 13th, 2014, 6:14 pm](#comment-263828)

    Hi Tim & Brian!

    My first post ever!

    To Tim first,\
     Thank you so much for all the great materials that you put on your
    blog! I first ran into your 4HWW concept while I was working
    offshore bored to death browsing on internet the content of a
    conference in a french engineering school. I managed to sneak the
    pdf on the net for free – et j’ai dévoré le livre en 2jours. However
    I did not expect it to have so much impact on the “rest of my life”,
    I ended up buying your books simply because they are worth every
    cent! So thanks again for the amazing materials online & in your
    books. Keep it as amazing as it and enjoy your life.

    Now Brian,

    You are quite impressive with your learning! Thank you so much for
    sharing that with us, this is exactly what learning & speaking
    foreign languages is about! Now I will continue in French for you:\
     J’ai suivi pendant 3ans des cours de Japonais au lycée et je dois
    dire que le professeur de Japonais que nous avions était un peu
    “déjanté” car il nous disait qu’il fallait apprendre plusieurs
    langues en même temps, que le Japonais était très simple, que le
    polynésien l’était encore plus et que au lieu d’apprendre le Russe
    tout seul autant l’apprendre avec un livre dans une autre langue
    (example livre Espagnol pour apprendre le Russe). Bref ce prof nous
    a toujours impressionné mais surtout par le fait qu’il ai réussi à
    nous faire apprendre 100 fois plus que les autres professeurs de
    langue (Allemand, Espagnol ou Anglais) en 2,5 fois moins de temps!
    J’ai pu tester un peu mon Japonais lors d’un voyage au Japon un an
    après et le résultat n’était pas si mal… même si j’aurais pu faire
    mieux! Aujourd’hui, 9ans après ma dernière leçon de Jap, les Kanji
    sont quasiment tous oubliés (j’étais censé en connaître quasiment
    350), par contre quand je les vois je sais que je les ai appris
    autrefois. Il ne s’agit donc que de réactiver ma mémoire pour que la
    moitié revienne sans trop de diffuclté! Idem pour les
    phrases/vocabulaire je me souviens surtout des phrases types!\
     Quant à l’Espagnol & le Portuguais si tu es / ou parles Français tu
    as fait déjà 20% du chemin!

    So what’s your next language on your to learn list?!!

    I hope you keep on discovering new languages and having fun!

    Thanks for sharing all that again!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263828#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3a275119d92b1071d1e3600d42a86506?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Nate — [March 13th, 2014, 6:34 pm](#comment-263832)

    This such a brilliant post with a buttload of great recommendations!
    His recommendation of italki has really got me on the right track.
    Benny ayudame mucho! Cuidate

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263832#respond)

-   ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/06326f81f25bfb1a0accb98da4465a1c?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    vin — [March 13th, 2014, 8:11 pm](#comment-263860)

    Thank you, this is great. I became fluent at understanding German at
    about 6months of immersed daily conversations living in Germany. At
    about the 1 year mark I was pretty fluent. I’ve been wanting to
    start working on a new language and this sounds like it’s the best
    way to go, especially with how spread thin I am. Thanks again!
    ![:)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263860#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/73442404397362c43063ad635da9c100?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Agne](http://theasiancinemablog.com/) — [March 14th, 2014, 12:05
    am](#comment-263909)

    Just watched your full Skype chat video. You guys are amazing. I got
    an inspiration to tackle Filipino as I am going to the Philippines
    for 3 weeks or so. Hope to make some videos of my progress hacking
    it in your principles and see how it goes.

    As for my experiences with language, gosh so many. Most I think are
    in Chinese, as Taiwan is such a great country to live in. But other
    really cool previous experience is with Polish language. I was
    exchange student in Warsaw and had some Polish classes. It was a bit
    easier to learn Polish as I knew other Slavic language before –
    Russian. I got to more or less fluency level within 3 months. I did
    a lot of hichhiking there and one trip was going all the way to
    Germany to meet my friend who came there from USA. I was picked up
    by a truck, the driver spoke only Polish. I was in an interesting
    situation – my American friend’s phone was not working well in
    Europe, so we did not really have a set place to meet. He was
    driving towards towards us, and we would meet at some gas station.
    But truck drivers have limits on how long they can drive and they
    have to stop for rest. So it was a big mission there – me looking at
    a map, talking Polish to the driver, he was talking over radio to
    other truck drivers if they did spot my friends car or not. Time was
    running out, the truck had to stop. And in last moments, everything
    got figured out and my friend and the truck stopped at the same gas
    station. Was really fun adventure that I would have never been able
    to have if I did not speak Polish.

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263909#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b3aa5dbb6a5070eecd41ff259f91b7b6?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    [Ian Anderson](http://handycrowd.com/) — [March 14th, 2014, 12:39
    am](#comment-263913)

    Great post! I’ve been living in Norway for four years and married to
    a Norwegian for 12 and STILL don’t speak Norwegian…..

    I don’t hear very well and use that as an excuse but I just don’t
    seem to be able to find the confidence to overcome the mistakes and
    terrible accent. I sound like the french policeman in ‘allo ‘allo.

    How does a ‘perfectionist’ learn a language? I have started to take
    this seriously though and got the kids to put post it notes on
    everything in the home in Norwegian to start off with!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263913#respond)

-   ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3f43f4e3fd0eb5258878595d843ca919?s=64&d=identicon&r=R)

    Tom Pentzer — [March 14th, 2014, 9:28 am](#comment-263983)

    I’ve been wanting to learn Russian and to improve my Spanish for
    some time now. Seeing Benny’s TedX talk and reading this blog post
    has lit a fire in me. I purchased the new book, and I’m definitely
    going to investigate the diplomas mentioned above!

    You’re an inspiration, Benny!

    [Reply](/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/?replytocom=263983#respond)

[![image](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2008/01/13.png)
Subscribe to followup comments via
RSS](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/feed/)
| [TrackBack
URL](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/trackback/)

-   [![image](http://s29.postimg.org/m3aqu3gnr/Tim_Ferris_Banner.jpg)](https://quarterly.co/contributors/timothy-ferriss)

    ### Most Popular

    -   Current Hits
    -   All Time
    -   Tim’s Faves
    -   Lifestyle 101

    -   #### [12 Rules for Learning Foreign Languages in Record Time -- The Only Post You'll Ever Need](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/)

    -   #### [The Art of Learning: The Tool of Choice for Top Athletes, Traders, and Creatives](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/05/the-art-of-learning-joshua-waitzkin/)

    -   #### [How to Lose 20 lbs. of Fat in 30 Days... Without Doing Any Exercise](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/04/06/how-to-lose-20-lbs-of-fat-in-30-days-without-doing-any-exercise/)

    -   #### [From Geek to Freak: How I Gained 34 lbs. of Muscle in 4 Weeks](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/04/29/from-geek-to-freak-how-i-gained-34-lbs-of-muscle-in-4-weeks/)

    -   #### [Scientific Speed Reading: How to Read 300% Faster in 20 Minutes](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2009/07/30/speed-reading-and-accelerated-learning/)

    -   #### [How to Make Visa Obey Your Every Desire: The Credit Card Concierge Experiment](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2010/05/01/credit-card-concierge/)

    -   #### [Real Mind Control: The 21-Day No-Complaint Experiment](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/09/18/real-mind-control-the-21-day-no-complaint-experiment/)

    -   #### [Relax Like A Pro: 5 Steps to Hacking Your Sleep](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2008/01/27/relax-like-a-pro-5-steps-to-hacking-your-sleep/)

    -   #### [The Karmic Capitalist: Should I Wait Until I’m Rich to Give Back?](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/10/04/karmic-capitalist-should-i-wait-until-im-rich-to-give/)

    -   #### [The Top 5 Reasons to Be a Jack of All Trades](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/09/14/the-top-5-reasons-to-be-a-jack-of-all-trades/)

    -   #### [The Not-To-Do List: 9 Habits to Stop Now](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/08/16/the-not-to-do-list-9-habits-to-stop-now/)

    -   #### [The Art of Letting Bad Things Happen (and Weapons of Mass Distraction)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/10/25/weapons-of-mass-distractions-and-the-art-of-letting-bad-things-happen/)

    -   #### [How to Travel the World with 10 Pounds or Less (Plus: How to Negotiate Convertibles and Luxury Treehouses)](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/07/11/how-to-travel-the-world-with-10-pounds-or-less-plus-how-to-negotiate-convertibles-and-luxury-treehouses/)

    -   #### [How to Do The Impossible: Create a Paperless Life, Never Check Voicemail Again, Never Return Another Phone Call…](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2007/06/14/how-to-do-the-impossible-create-a-paperless-life-never-check-voicemail-again-never-return-another-phone-call/)

    **[See more popular posts
    »](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/popular/)**

-   ### Topics

    -   [4-Hour Case
        Studies](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/4-hour-case-studies/ "View all posts filed under 4-Hour Case Studies")
        (46)
    -   [Automation](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/automation/ "View all posts filed under Automation")
        (7)
    -   [Dance](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/dance/ "View all posts filed under Dance")
        (3)
    -   [E-mail
        Detox](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/e-mail-detox/ "View all posts filed under E-mail Detox")
        (20)
    -   [Entrepreneurship](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/entrepreneurship/ "View all posts filed under Entrepreneurship")
        (50)
    -   [Filling the
        Void](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/filling-the-void/ "View all posts filed under Filling the Void")
        (85)
    -   [Gadgets](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/gadgets/ "View all posts filed under Gadgets")
        (15)
    -   [Geoarbitrage](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/geoarbitrage/ "View all posts filed under Geoarbitrage")
        (8)
    -   [Interviews](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/interviews/ "View all posts filed under Interviews")
        (28)
    -   [Investing](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/investing/ "View all posts filed under Investing")
        (13)
    -   [Language](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/language/ "View all posts filed under Language")
        (14)
    -   [Low-Information
        Diet](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/low-information-diet-and-selective-ignorance/ "View all posts filed under Low-Information Diet")
        (41)
    -   [Marketing](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/marketing/ "View all posts filed under Marketing")
        (51)
    -   [Mental
        Performance](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/performance-psychology/ "View all posts filed under Mental Performance")
        (33)
    -   [Mini-retirements](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/mini-retirements/ "View all posts filed under Mini-retirements")
        (23)
    -   [Muse
        Examples](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/muse-examples/ "View all posts filed under Muse Examples")
        (9)
    -   [Nonsense](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/nonsense/ "View all posts filed under Nonsense")
        (5)
    -   [Opening the Kimono –
        OTK](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/opening-the-kimono-otk/ "View all posts filed under Opening the Kimono – OTK")
        (4)
    -   [Outsourcing
        Life](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/outsourcing-life/ "View all posts filed under Outsourcing Life")
        (16)
    -   [Physical
        Performance](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/physical-performance/ "View all posts filed under Physical Performance")
        (40)
    -   [Practical
        Philosophy](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/practical-philosophy/ "View all posts filed under Practical Philosophy")
        (25)
    -   [Presentations](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/presentations/ "View all posts filed under Presentations")
        (3)
    -   [Protecting
        Time](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/protecting-personal-time/ "View all posts filed under Protecting Time")
        (12)
    -   [Quarterly
        Shipments](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/quarterly-shipments/ "View all posts filed under Quarterly Shipments")
        (3)
    -   [Random](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/random/ "View all posts filed under Random")
        (22)
    -   [Remote
        Offices](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/remote-offices/ "View all posts filed under Remote Offices")
        (7)
    -   [Rockstar Living
        in…](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/how-to-live-like-a-rockstar-in/ "View all posts filed under Rockstar Living in…")
        (5)
    -   [Science](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/science-2/ "View all posts filed under Science")
        (2)
    -   [The 4-Hour Body –
        4HB](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/the-4-hour-body/ "View all posts filed under The 4-Hour Body – 4HB")
        (43)
    -   [The 4-Hour Chef –
        4HC](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/the-4-hour-chef/ "View all posts filed under The 4-Hour Chef – 4HC")
        (37)
    -   [The 4-Hour Chef
        Recipes](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/the-4-hour-chef-recipes/ "View all posts filed under The 4-Hour Chef Recipes")
        (1)
    -   [The Book –
        4HWW](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/the-4-hour-workweek-book/ "View all posts filed under The Book – 4HWW")
        (41)
    -   [The Slow-Carb
        Diet](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/the-slow-carb-diet/ "View all posts filed under The Slow-Carb Diet")
        (4)
    -   [The Tim Ferriss Experiment –
        TFX](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/the-tim-ferriss-experiment-tfx/ "View all posts filed under The Tim Ferriss Experiment – TFX")
        (5)
    -   [Tim Ferriss Book
        Club](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/tim-ferriss-book-club/ "View all posts filed under Tim Ferriss Book Club")
        (3)
    -   [Travel](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/travel/ "View all posts filed under Travel")
        (62)
    -   [Writing and
        Blogging](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/category/writing-and-blogging/ "View all posts filed under Writing and Blogging")
        (21)

-   -   ### Tim on Facebook…

-   ### Tim's Photos and More

    -   [![The Art of Learning - by Joshua
        Waitzkin](http://farm8.staticflickr.com/7325/12955380805_fc35cc4bc6_s.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/timferriss/12955380805/ "The Art of Learning - by Joshua Waitzkin")
    -   [![The Random Show - Behind the
        Scenes](http://farm8.staticflickr.com/7454/12352685664_fa18d9a246_s.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/timferriss/12352685664/ "The Random Show - Behind the Scenes")
    -   [![One Month Without
        Phone](http://farm6.staticflickr.com/5500/11520981196_4bbd4fb65a_s.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/timferriss/11520981196/ "One Month Without Phone")
    -   [![Daily Rituals -- Tim Ferriss Book Club, Book
        \#2](http://farm8.staticflickr.com/7357/11397010395_827d83252a_s.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/timferriss/11397010395/ "Daily Rituals -- Tim Ferriss Book Club, Book #2")
    -   [![The\_Tim\_Ferriss\_Experiment\_\_Watch\_The\_Series\_Premiere\_\_-\_upwave](http://farm6.staticflickr.com/5500/11076813056_aed3af95f1_s.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/timferriss/11076813056/ "The_Tim_Ferriss_Experiment__Watch_The_Series_Premiere__-_upwave")
    -   [![Vagabonding](http://farm3.staticflickr.com/2880/10795674933_be8ccdc314_s.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/timferriss/10795674933/ "Vagabonding")

-   

[XML
Sitemap](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-content/themes/timferriss_bb-revised/sitemap.xml)
/ [WordPress Sitemap](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/sitemap/) /
[Site Terms of
Service](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/about/terms-of-service/) /
[Powered by MediaTemple](http://www.mediatemple.net/) Copyright ©
2007–2014 Tim Ferriss.\
THE 4-HOUR® is a registered trademark of Tim Ferriss.\
All rights reserved.

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/wp-content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif)
[Cancel](#cancel)

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

![image](http://ad.retargeter.com/seg?add=430515&t=2)

![image](https://www.googleadservices.com/pagead/conversion/1016943594/?value=0&label=0TBqCN75hwMQ6qf15AM&guid=ON&script=0)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2014/03/12/how-to-learn-a-foreign-language/
