[wingolog](/)
=============

[about](/about/) | [software](/software/) | [writings](/writings/) |
[photos](/photos/)

-   [subscribe ![[feed]](/wp-content/feed-icon-14x14.png)](/feed/atom)
    ------------------------------------------------------------------

-   related
    -------

    -   [a register vm for
        guile](/archives/2013/11/26/a-register-vm-for-guile)
    -   [scheme quiz time!](/archives/2013/11/02/scheme-quiz-time)
    -   [guile and delimited
        continuations](/archives/2010/02/26/guile-and-delimited-continuations)
    -   [stack overflow](/archives/2014/03/17/stack-overflow)
    -   [compost, a leaf function compiler for
        guile](/archives/2014/02/18/compost-a-leaf-function-compiler-for-guile)
    -   [elf in guile](/archives/2014/01/19/elf-in-guile)
    -   [a continuation-passing style intermediate language for
        guile](/archives/2014/01/12/a-continuation-passing-style-intermediate-language-for-guile)
    -   [on generators](/archives/2013/02/25/on-generators)
    -   [opengl particle simulation in
        guile](/archives/2013/02/16/opengl-particle-simulation-in-guile)
    -   [an opinionated guide to scheme
        implementations](/archives/2013/01/07/an-opinionated-guide-to-scheme-implementations)

[sidelong glimpses](/archives/2010/02/14/sidelong-glimpses)
-----------------------------------------------------------

### 14 February 2010 11:55 PM ([guile](/tags/guile) | [scheme](/tags/scheme) | [flatt](/tags/flatt) | [continuations](/tags/continuations) | [delimited](/tags/delimited))

Evening, tubes. I don't usually post about works-in-progress, but this
one has been on my mind for two or three weeks, really paralyzing my
mojo, so perhaps getting it out in textual form will help me move on a
bit.

**operation delimited continuation**

So yes, to my non-programmer audience, let this be a pleasantly written
but unintelligible lullaby, a word-train rocking you to sleep; but to
the nerds out there, I'm quite fascinated with this topic, and I hope
I'm able to convey some of that fascination to you.

Consider the following C program:

    #include <stdlib.h>

    int main ()
    {
      abort ();
      return 0;
    }

Let's assume we have it in `foo.c`, and compile it. We'll do so from
[`tcsh`](http://www.tcsh.org/Welcome), for reasons to be explained
later.

    $ tcsh
    % limit coredumpsize unlimited
    % gcc foo.c

OK, we should have a binary in `a.out`. Now, we run it, with predictable
effects:

    % ./a.out
    Abort (core dumped)
    % ls -l core
    -rw------- 1 wingo wingo 151552 2010-02-14 21:37 core

So, what happened was that the program ran, then it got to the `abort`,
which caused it to unexpectedly exit. Where did it exit to? In this
case, back to the prompt.

That program is no longer running, but when it exited, it left behind a
copy of its state -- of its *continuation*. A continuation is what's
left of a computation. In this case, what's left is for `abort` to
return, then `main` returns 0, then probably some system-specific code,
then we'd be back at the prompt again. Aborting just brought us back to
the prompt a little faster.

Anyway, the [core dump](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Core_dump) has all
of the data that would be necessary to complete the process'
computation. With a debugger you can get in and see what that data was,
but you can't run the program again from that point -- you'd need some
extra OS-level support for that.

**why are you talking about this stuff**

Glad you asked! Core dumps are really a specific instance of *control
features* in programming languages. Control features are what allow you
to skip around in your program. In this case, we skipped back to the
prompt.

Scheme includes support for a very low-level control feature known as
*continuations*. With continuations, you can implement all kinds of
things, like exceptions, coroutines, generators, and short-cut
operators. You can make up new control operators in a Scheme library and
add them to an innocent, unsuspecting program.

Many people are aware of this, but fewer know that continuations have a
problem, a big problem. The origin of the problem is that a continuation
captures the whole future of a computation, not just a part of it. So if
you implemented exceptions with continuations, imagine dumping core
every time you threw an exception. Not very efficient, no?

Well the truth is more complicated of course. If you have access to the
entirety of a program, the compiler can transform your code into what is
known as [continuation-passing
style](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuation-passing_style) (which
the laity may recognize by the weaker names of
[single-static-assignment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single_assignment_form)
or [A-normal
form](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_normal_form)) and in
that case invoking a continuation is just like calling a function. But
for the rest of us, we have to play tricks with dynamic extents,
incrementally dumping parts of the core as the program enters different
dynamic extents.

(I'm simplifying here, to continue the core-dump metaphor, in the
knowledge that the clergy will correct this doctrine in the comments.)

But in the general case, capturing and reinstating continuations can be
quite expensive, because in the absence of sophisticated analysis, one
simply dumps the whole core. It's a terrible but common implementation
strategy.

There are other, deeper problems with continuations as present in
Scheme, notably the lack of composability. Though I do understand that
this problem is deeper, I don't understand its depths, so I'm going to
forgo a discussion of that here.

**the solution: more power**

So, continuations are great, but they can be expensive to implement. OK.
In this context it's amusing that the solution to this problem is
actually to give continuations more power.

The problem is that in Scheme you have control over *where* you dump
core, but not *how far* you dump core. While it's true that
continuations logically capture the whole future of a computation, in
practice that continuation has a limit: the process boundary. Our
`a.out` was spawned at the tcsh prompt, but it has no access to the
implementation of the shell itself, not to mention the kernel.

So, more power, as we were saying: let's allow programs to *delimit* the
range of computation captured by a continuation. Instead of capturing
continuations up to the process boundary, a program can capture a
continuation only up to a certain point in a program.

Pleasantly, that point is known as a `%`, pronounced "prompt". (Dorai
Sitaram notes that he would have preferred `>`, but it was taken by
greater-than. Also, this comes from back in 1993, so perhaps he can be
forgiven the tcsh-style prompt.)

It's as if you were implementing a shell in your program, as if your
program were an operating system for other programs.

Here's a translation of `foo.c` into a Scheme that supports prompts:

    (define (foo)
      (abort)
      0)

And now we run it, in a prompt:

    (% (foo)
       (lambda (core . args)
         (format #t "Abort (core dumped): ~a\n" core)
         (format #t "Arguments to abort: ~a\n" args)
         1))
    ;; =| Abort (core dumped): #<continuation ... >
    ;; =| Arguments to abort: 
    ;; => 1

The second argument to `%` is the "handler". When `abort` is called,
control returns to the handler, and the continuation -- the "core dump"
-- is passed as the first argument. Unlike in UNIX, `abort` in Scheme
can take any number of arguments. Those arguments are passed to the
handler.

Also unlike UNIX, the core dump may be revived; but normal Scheme
continuations do have a UNIX similarity in that reviving them is like
invoking `exec(3)` -- they replace the current process image with a new
one. This might be the right thing for user space to do, but if you're
implementing a kernel, scheduling a process shouldn't give that process
control over the whole system.

Instead, delimited continuations are more like functions, in that you
can call them for a value. Like this:

    (% (foo)
       (lambda (core . args)
         (format #t "Abort (core dumped, but continuing): ~a\n" core)
         (format #t "Arguments to abort: ~a\n" args)
         (core))) ;; revivify the core, letting the program finish
    ;; =| Abort (core dumped, but continuing): #<continuation ...>
    ;; =| Arguments to abort: 
    ;; => 0

**gloves off**

If you didn't know about continuations before, and you've gotten this
far, then drinks all around! If not, then, um, drinks all around? In any
case, we're going more hard-core now, so you'll need it.

Delimited continuations are not quite a new topic. The first reference
that I'm aware of that begins to understand the problem is *The theory
and practice of first-class prompts*, by Matthias Felleisen, in 1988.

![image](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/1/18/Scroogeswim.jpg)

Unfortunately that document is only available behind a paywall, because
the ACM is a pack of scrooge mcducks. So instead you'll probably have to
deal with Sitaram and Felleisen's 1990 contribution, [*Control
delimiters and their
hierarchies*](http://www.ccis.northeastern.edu/scheme/pubs/lasc1990-sf.pdf).

But don't read that one first. First, read Sitaram's beautifully clear
1993 paper, [*Handling
control*](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/scheme/pubs/pldi93-sitaram.pdf), which
is a lovely exposition of the offerings that delimited continuations
have to the working Scheme programmer.

An obvious extension of Sitaram's work is in the implementation of
abstractions that look like operating systems. Back in those days it
wasn't quite possible to imagine, but the current example would be the
web server, where each *session* is a different process. So we return
HTML and wait for the user to come back, and in the meantime schedule
other processes; and when they do come back, we resume their session via
resuming their computational process.

It's typically said that with continuations you can implement any
control feature, but that's not true if your target language also has
continuations. For example, you can implement exceptions with
continuations plus mutable state, but if the program you are running
*also* uses continuations in their standard Scheme form, the program's
use can conflict with the implementation of exceptions, producing
incorrect programs.

**feature on top of feature**

This is why it's 2010 now and no major programming language includes
delimited continuations in its specification -- because it's tough to
see how they interact with other primitive elements of the language.
There has been a lot of research on this recently, with some promising
results.

But before I move onto the shining light, I should mention a pit of
darkness, which is the profusion of delimited control operators in the
literature.

Sitaram in his papers proposes `prompt` (or `%`) and `control` (similar
to `abort`) as his primary delimited continuation operators. But there
are others. The ones that are seen most often in the literature are
`shift` and `reset`, and also there is `cupto`. It was only in 2007 that
Dybvig, Peyton-Jones, and Sabry were able to tease out their
relationship; if you are interested, I highly recommend the first third
of [*A monadic framework for delimited
continuations*](http://www.cs.indiana.edu/~dyb/pubs/monadicDC.pdf),
despite the title.

This result was mentioned by Matthew Flatt's 2007 paper, co-written by
Yu, Findler, and Felleisen, [*Adding Delimited and Composable Control to
a Production Programming
Environment*](http://www.cs.utah.edu/plt/publications/icfp07-fyff.pdf).
All this article has really been a prelude to mentioning this paper, and
I think it merits a section of its own.

**the flatt contribution**

Go ahead and open up the [Flatt
paper](http://www.cs.utah.edu/plt/publications/icfp07-fyff.pdf), and
skim through it.

I'll wait.

OK! First impressions?

Mine were, "what is the deal with all those pictures?". They seemed to
be an affectation of friendliness, but appeasing neither the uninitiates
nor the academics. But reading the paper in more depth, I was really
impressed by their ability to convey information to the Scheme
practitioner.

Because let's face it, there are piles and piles of terrible papers out
there; and, what's worse, piles and piles of potentially good papers
that simply aren't intelligible to the practicing programmer. OK, I dig
on the lambda calculus; but what is your supposedly-proven result from
your toy grammar going to do to help me make programs?

So I've always been skeptical, perhaps overly skeptical, of the desire
to prove properties about programs, of the need to justify with
symbology what you already know to be right. I still haven't seen the
light. But at least now I know it exists, thanks to Flatt et al's paper.

The practical problem that I had was that Guile's `catch` and `throw`
still weren't quite integrated with its new virtual machine; they caused
the virtual machine to recurse, calling itself reentrantly. Besides
being inelegant, this forced the catch expression and handler to be
allocated as closures, and restricted potential optimizations.

So I started to look at how I could express `catch` and `throw` in
Guile's intermediate language. It was not clear that I could add them in
an orthogonal way, until I remembered something I read about delimited
continuations; but it wasn't until the Flatt paper that I really
understood how to implement `catch` and `throw` in terms of these
lower-level primitives.

But again, it seems I'm writing into the night, so I'll try to wrap up
briefly. The form of `catch` is like this:

    catch key thunk handler [pre-unwind-handler]

Then on the other side, you have `throw`:

    throw key arg ...

I'm not trying to argue these are the best control operators, not by a
long shot; but they are what we have now, so we need to support them.

So, following Flatt, imagine we have a fluid (dynamically-bound)
variable, *%eh*, the exception handler. Then `throw` is easy:

    throw key arg ... =
      (fluid-ref %eh) key arg ...

Yay psuedocode. `catch` is trickier, though:

    catch key thunk handler =
      let prompt-tag = (fresh-tag)
        % prompt-tag
          with-fluids %eh = (throw-handler prompt-tag key)
            (thunk)
          λ (cont thrown-key arg ...)
           handler thrown-key arg ...

Aside from the pseudo-code being obtuse, perhaps you're confused that
the `%` there has three arguments -- a tag, then an expression, then the
handler (a lambda). Well the tag is useful to identify a particular
prompt, so that an `abort` can jump back to a particular location, not
just the most recent prompt.

Also you're probably underwhelmed, that most of the interesting work was
pushed off into `throw-handler`, which takes the given handler and does
some magic to it. Well indeed, there is some magic:

    throw-handler prompt-tag catch-key =
      let prev-eh == (fluid-ref %eh)
        λ (thrown-key arg ...)
         if thrown-key is catch-key or catch-key is true
           abort prompt-tag thrown-key arg ...
         else
           prev-eh thrown-key arg ...

So the resulting throw-handler would run in the context of the `throw`
invocation, and if the key matches, or we are catching all throws
(`catch-key is true`), we'll jump back to the prompt.

Note that in our definition of `catch`, the first argument is the
captured continuation, but that argument is never referenced. This
simple observation allows us to note at compile-time that the
continuation does not need to be reified -- there's no need to dump
core, it's just a `longjmp()`.

Guile also supports pre-unwind handlers: handlers that run in the
context of the `throw` instead of the context of the `catch`. Since
Flatt breezed over this in his paper, I'll mention an implementation of
that here:

    catch key thunk handler pre-unwind-handler =
      let prompt-tag = (fresh-tag)
        % prompt-tag
          with-fluids
              %eh = (custom-throw-handler prompt-tag key pre-unwind-handler)
            (thunk)
          λ (cont thrown-key arg ...)
           handler thrown-key arg ...

So, all the same, except the handler is made by `custom-throw-handler`.

    custom-throw-handler prompt-tag key f =
      let prev = fluid-ref %eh,
          running = make-fluid false
        λ (thrown-key arg ...)
         if thrown-key is key or key is true
           let was-running = fluid-ref running
             with-fluids running = true
               if not was-running
                 f thrown-key arg ...
               # fall through in any case
               if prompt-tag
                 abort prompt-tag thrown-key arg ...
               else
                 prev thrown-key arg ...
         else
           prev thrown-key arg ...

**what**

I know your eyes are glazing over by now. Mine are too, and it's not
just the wine. But there's something important here.

The important thing is that small sigil, `=`; those definitions really
are it. If you can prove anything about the behavior of `catch` now, you
should be able to prove it about the new implementation above -- even
though it works completely differently.

That's power! Power to refactor, knowing that your refactorings are
correct. Because I was lost in a morass, paralyzed in front of my
keyboard, wondering about the ghosts awaiting me if I poked code. Now I
know. I need an efficient with-fluids, some pieces of prompt and abort,
and to add that all to the bootstrap language of Guile, and I have it.
It's right. And I know it is because Flatt et al have already done all
of the calculations for me :)

**the sound of mandolins**

I realize it's something of a fizzleout ending, but I think it has to
remain that way before I get it all into git. Inshallah we'll be rolling
like this to Guile 1.9.8, though it could very well be 1.9.9. But either
way, I didn't imagine myself saying this, but thank you, Flatt & crew:
your formal work has led me to see the way out of my practical problem.
Cheers!

### 4 responses

1.  Jakub Piotr Cłapa says:\
    [15 February 2010 11:33
    AM](#b6b53bdd3745756cbc2755203b21a4e35dbac759)

    Flatt, Felleisen & the whole PLT Scheme crew have many papers which
    quite nicely mix programming language theory and practice. And their
    mailing list is insightful too.

2.  Jakub Piotr Cłapa says:\
    [15 February 2010 11:34
    AM](#b49dc747cdc704a20a9ee2a6219b6884c22298ee)

    It would be nice to have & automatically escape to &amp; in the
    comments. Either this or a better error message. ;)

3.  [Brian Gough](http://blogs.fsfe.org/bjg/) says:\
    [15 February 2010 10:01
    PM](#a14505a73c787b3e5674d9aa2d517daf7c4f27be)

    Thanks for the nice explanation!

4.  Andy Moreton says:\
    [15 February 2010 11:45
    PM](#ccced08323575dbb4053ff5529e3c0eeacf90699)

    For more reading on this sort of thing, have a look at:\
    http://okmij.org/ftp/Computation/Continuations.html\
    and all of the other goodness from Oleg.

### Leave a Reply

Name

Mail (will not be published)

Website

What's your favorite number?

powered by [tekuti](http://wingolog.org/software/tekuti/)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://wingolog.org/archives/2010/02/14/sidelong-glimpses
