[![image](http://atlanticmedia.122.2o7.net/b/ss/atlanticprod/1/H.22--NS/0)](http://www.omniture.com "Web Analytics")

[The Atlantic](/ "The Atlantic Home")
=====================================

[Features:](/features/) The Future of College?
==============================================

-   Menu

    ### All Atlantic

    -   [Home](/)
    -   [Politics](/politics/)
    -   [Business](/business/)
    -   [Tech](/tech/)
    -   [Entertainment](/entertainment/)
    -   [Health](/health/)
    -   [Education](/education/)
    -   [Sexes](/sexes/)
    -   [National](/national/)
    -   [Global](/international/)
    -   [Video](/video/)
    -   [Magazine](/magazine/)
    -   [In Focus](/infocus/)
    -   [Special Reports](/special-reports/)
    -   [Books](/books/)
    -   [Events](/live/)

    ### Follow Us

    -   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/TheAtlantic)
    -   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/TheAtlantic)
    -   [LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/today/theatlantic.com)
    -   [Google +](https://plus.google.com/109258622984321091629/posts)
    -   [RSS](/follow-the-atlantic/#rssFeeds)
    -   [App Store](http://wda.biz/mrmxub)
    -   [Play
        Store](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.theatlantic.weekly_android)

    ### Search

    Search

    ### [Subscribe](https://ssl.palmcoastd.com/23301/apps/ORDER_57881?ikey=I**A1J)

Adam Voorhes

The Future of College?
======================

A brash tech entrepreneur thinks he can reinvent higher education by
stripping it down to its essence, eliminating lectures and tenure along
with football games, ivy-covered buildings, and research libraries. What
if he's right?

* * * * *

[Graeme Wood](/graeme-wood/ "Graeme Wood")

August 13, 2014

Presented by

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dlogo&sz=88x31&c=857697270&tile=1)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dlogo&sz=88x31&c=857697270&tile=1)

-   [Facebook](#)
-   [Twitter](#)
-   [LinkedIn](#)
-   [Google+](#)
-   [Email](mailto:?subject=The%20Atlantic:%20The%20Future%20of%20College%3F%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20&body=A%20brash%20tech%20entrepreneur%20thinks%20he%20can%20reinvent%20higher%20education%20by%20stripping%20it%20down%20to%20its%20essence%2C%20eliminating%20lectures%20and%20tenure%20along%20with%20football%20games%2C%20ivy-covered%20buildings%2C%20and%20research%20libraries.%20What%20if%20he%27s%20right%3F%C2%A0%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%0A%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20Read%20this:%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/08/the-future-of-college/375071/)
-   [Comments](#disqus_thread)

On a Friday morning in April, I strapped on a headset, leaned into a
microphone, and experienced what had been described to me as a type of
time travel to the future of higher education. I was on the ninth floor
of a building in downtown San Francisco, in a neighborhood whose streets
are heavily populated with winos and vagrants, and whose buildings host
hip new businesses, many of them tech start-ups. In a small room, I was
flanked by a publicist and a tech manager from an educational venture
called the Minerva Project, whose founder and CEO, the 39-year-old
entrepreneur Ben Nelson, aims to replace (or, when he is feeling less
aggressive, “reform”) the modern liberal-arts college.

Minerva is an accredited university with administrative offices and a
dorm in San Francisco, and it plans to open locations in at least six
other major world cities. But the key to Minerva, what sets it apart
most jarringly from traditional universities, is a proprietary online
platform developed to apply pedagogical practices that have been studied
and vetted by one of the world’s foremost psychologists, a former
Harvard dean named Stephen M. Kosslyn, who joined Minerva in 2012.

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures1&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=0)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures1&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=0)

Nelson and Kosslyn had invited me to sit in on a test run of the
platform, and at first it reminded me of the opening credits of *The
Brady Bunch*: a grid of images of the professor and eight “students”
(the others were all Minerva employees) appeared on the screen before
me, and we introduced ourselves. For a college seminar, it felt
impersonal, and though we were all sitting on the same floor of
Minerva’s offices, my fellow students seemed oddly distant, as if piped
in from the International Space Station. I half expected a packet of
astronaut ice cream to float by someone’s face.

Within a few minutes, though, the experience got more intense. The
subject of the class—one in a series during which the instructor, a
French physicist named Eric Bonabeau, was trying out his course
material—was inductive reasoning. Bonabeau began by polling us on our
understanding of the reading, a *Nature*article about the sudden
depletion of North Atlantic cod in the early 1990s. He asked us which of
four possible interpretations of the article was the most accurate. In
an ordinary undergraduate seminar, this might have been an occasion for
timid silence, until the class’s biggest loudmouth or most caffeinated
student ventured a guess. But the Minerva class extended no refuge for
the timid, nor privilege for the garrulous. Within seconds, every
student had to provide an answer, and Bonabeau displayed our choices so
that we could be called upon to defend them.

Bonabeau led the class like a benevolent dictator, subjecting us to pop
quizzes, cold calls, and pedagogical tactics that during an in-the-flesh
seminar would have taken precious minutes of class time to arrange. He
split us into groups to defend opposite propositions—that the cod had
disappeared because of overfishing, or that other factors were to blame.
No one needed to shuffle seats; Bonabeau just pushed a button, and the
students in the other group vanished from my screen, leaving my three
fellow debaters and me to plan, using a shared bulletin board on which
we could record our ideas. Bonabeau bounced between the two groups to
offer advice as we worked. After a representative from each group gave a
brief presentation, Bonabeau ended by showing a short video about the
evils of overfishing. (“Propaganda,” he snorted, adding that we’d talk
about logical fallacies in the next session.) The computer screen
blinked off after 45 minutes of class.

The system had bugs—it crashed once, and some of the video lagged—but
overall it worked well, and felt decidedly unlike a normal classroom.
For one thing, it was exhausting: a continuous period of forced
engagement, with no relief in the form of time when my attention could
flag or I could doodle in a notebook undetected. Instead, my focus was
directed relentlessly by the platform, and because it looked like my
professor and fellow edu-nauts were staring at me, I was reluctant to
ever let my gaze stray from the screen. Even in moments when I wanted to
think about aspects of the material that weren’t currently under
discussion—to me these seemed like moments of creative space, but
perhaps they were just daydreams—I felt my attention snapped back to the
narrow issue at hand, because I had to answer a quiz question or
articulate a position. I was forced, in effect, to learn. If this was
the education of the future, it seemed vaguely fascistic. Good, but
fascistic.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/08/0914_WEL_Wood_Minerva_intro_V1_WEBcrop/cbf77d00f.jpg)Minerva’s
headquarters are in San Francisco, and the first class of students will
live in a dorm there this year, but the university plans to open
locations in at least six other cities, including Ber­lin and Buenos
Aires. (Ike Edeani)

Minerva, which operates for profit, started teaching its inaugural class
of 33 students this month. To seed this first class with talent, Minerva
gave every admitted student a full-tuition scholarship of $10,000 a year
for four years, plus free housing in San Francisco for the first year.
Next year’s class is expected to have 200 to 300 students, and Minerva
hopes future classes will double in size roughly every year for a few
years after that.

Those future students will pay about $28,000 a year, including room and
board, a $30,000 savings over the sticker price of many of the
schools—the Ivies, plus other hyperselective colleges like Pomona and
Williams—with which Minerva hopes to compete. (Most American students at
these colleges do not pay full price, of course; Minerva will offer
financial aid and target middle-class students whose bills at the other
schools would still be tens of thousands of dollars more per year.) If
Minerva grows to 2,500 students a class, that would mean an annual
revenue of up to $280 million. A partnership with the Keck Graduate
Institute in Claremont, California, allowed Minerva to fast-track its
accreditation, and its advisory board has included Larry Summers, the
former U.S. Treasury secretary and Harvard president, and Bob Kerrey,
the former Democratic senator from Nebraska, who also served as the
president of the New School, in New York City.

Nelson’s long-term goal for Minerva is to radically remake one of the
most sclerotic sectors of the U.S. economy, one so shielded from the
need for improvement that its biggest innovation in the past 30 years
has been to double its costs and hire more administrators at higher
salaries.

The paradox of undergraduate education in the United States is that it
is the envy of the world, but also tremendously beleaguered. In that way
it resembles the U.S. health-care sector. Both carry price tags that
shock the conscience of citizens of other developed countries. They’re
both tied up inextricably with government, through student loans and
federal research funding or through Medicare. But if you can afford the
Mayo Clinic, the United States is the best place in the world to get
sick. And if you get a scholarship to Stanford, you should take it, and
turn down offers from even the best universities in Europe, Australia,
or Japan. (Most likely, though, you won’t get that scholarship. The
average U.S. college graduate in 2014 carried $33,000 of debt.)

Some claim education is an art and a science. Nelson has disputed this:
“It’s a science and a science.”

Financial dysfunction is only the most obvious way in which higher
education is troubled. In the past half millennium, the technology of
learning has hardly budged. The easiest way to picture what a university
looked like 500 years ago is to go to any large university today, walk
into a lecture hall, and imagine the professor speaking Latin and
wearing a monk’s cowl. The most common class format is still a professor
standing in front of a group of students and talking. And even though
we’ve subjected students to lectures for hundreds of years, we have no
evidence that they are a good way to teach. (One educational
psychologist, Ludy Benjamin, likens lectures to Velveeta
cheese—something lots of people consume but no one considers either
delicious or nourishing.)

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures2&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=2)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures2&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=2)

In recent years, other innovations in higher education have preceded
Minerva, most famously massive open online courses, known by the
unfortunate acronym MOOCs. Among the most prominent MOOC purveyors are
Khan Academy, the brainchild of the entrepreneur Salman Khan, and
Coursera, headed by the Stanford computer scientists Andrew Ng and
Daphne Koller. Khan Academy began as a way to tutor children in math,
but it has grown to include a dazzling array of tutorials, some very
effective, many on technical subjects. Coursera offers college-level
classes for free (you can pay for premium services, like actual college
credit). There can be hundreds of thousands of students in a single
course, and millions are enrolled altogether. At their most basic, these
courses consist of standard university lectures, caught on video.

But Minerva is not a MOOC provider. Its courses are not massive (they’re
capped at 19 students), open (Minerva is overtly elitist and selective),
or online, at least not in the same way Coursera’s are. Lectures are
banned. All Minerva classes take the form of seminars conducted on the
platform I tested. The first students will by now have moved into
Minerva’s dorm on the fifth floor of a building in San Francisco’s Nob
Hill neighborhood and begun attending class on Apple laptops they were
required to supply themselves.

Each year, according to Minerva’s plan, they’ll attend university in a
different place, so that after four years they’ll have the kind of
international experience that other universities advertise but can
rarely deliver. By 2016, Berlin and Buenos Aires campuses will have
opened. Likely future cities include Mumbai, Hong Kong, New York, and
London. Students will live in dorms with two-person rooms and a communal
kitchen. They’ll also take part in field trips organized by Minerva,
such as a tour of Alcatraz with a prison psychologist. Minerva will
maintain almost no facilities other than the dorm itself—no library, no
dining hall, no gym—and students will use city parks and recreation
centers, as well as other local cultural resources, for their
extracurricular activities.

Lectures, Kosslyn says, are cost-effective but pedagogically unsound. “A
great way to teach, but a terrible way to learn.”

The professors can live anywhere, as long as they have an Internet
connection. Given that many academics are coastal-elite types who refuse
to live in places like Evansville, Indiana, geographic freedom is a
vital part of Minerva’s faculty recruitment.

The student body could become truly global, in part because Minerva’s
policy is to admit students without regard to national origin, thus
catering to the unmet demand of, say, prosperous Chinese and Indians and
Brazilians for American-style liberal-arts education.

The Minerva boast is that it will strip the university experience down
to the aspects that are shown to contribute directly to student
learning. Lectures, gone. Tenure, gone. Gothic architecture, football,
ivy crawling up the walls—gone, gone, gone. What’s left will be leaner
and cheaper. (Minerva has already attracted $25 million in capital from
investors who think it can undercut the incumbents.) And Minerva
officials claim that their methods will be tested against scientifically
determined best practices, unlike the methods used at other universities
and assumed to be sound just because the schools themselves are old and
expensive. Yet because classes have only just begun, we have little clue
as to whether the process of stripping down the university removes
something essential to what has made America’s best colleges the
greatest in the world.

Minerva will, after all, look very little like a university—and not
merely because it won’t be accessorized in useless and expensive ways.
The teaching methods may well be optimized, but universities, as
currently constituted, are only partly about classroom time. Can a
school that has no faculty offices, research labs, community spaces for
students, or professors paid to do scholarly work still be called a
university?

If Minerva fails, it will lay off its staff and sell its office
furniture and never be heard from again. If it succeeds, it could
inspire a legion of entrepreneurs, and a whole category of legacy
institutions might have to liquidate. One imagines tumbleweeds rolling
through abandoned quads and wrecking balls smashing through the windows
of classrooms left empty by students who have plugged into new online
platforms.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/08/0914_WEL_Wood_Minerva_working_V1/96ce48b9d.jpg)The
Minerva offices—where all employees work at open-plan stations—recall a
typical tech start-up far more than they do an academic building. (Ike
Edeani)

The decor in the lobby of the Minerva office building nods to the
classical roots of education: enormous Roman statues dominate. (Minerva
is the Roman goddess of wisdom.) But where Minerva’s employees work, on
the ninth floor, the atmosphere is pure business, in a California-casual
sort of way. Everyone, including the top officers of the university,
works at open-plan stations. I associate scholars’ offices with chalk
dust, strewn papers, and books stacked haphazardly in contravention of
fire codes. But here, I found tidiness.

One of the Minerva employees least scholarly in demeanor is its founder,
chief executive, and principal evangelist. Ben Nelson attended the
University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School as an undergraduate in the
late 1990s and then had no further contact with academia before he began
incubating Minerva, in 2010. His résumé’s main entry is his 10-year
stint as an executive at Snapfish, an online photo service that allows
users to print pictures on postcards and in books.

Nelson is curly-haired and bespectacled, and when I met him he wore a
casual button-down shirt with no tie or jacket. His ambition to reform
academia was born of his own undergraduate experience. At Wharton, he
was dissatisfied with what he perceived as a random barrage of business
instruction, with no coordination to ensure that he learned bedrock
skills like critical thinking. “My entire critique of higher education
started with curricular reform at Penn,” he says. “General education is
nonexistent. It’s effectively a buffet, and when you have a noncurated
academic experience, you effectively don’t get educated. You get a
random collection of information. Liberal-arts education is about
developing the intellectual capacity of the individual, and learning to
be a productive member of society. And you cannot do that without a
curriculum.”

Students begin their Minerva education by taking the same four
“Cornerstone Courses,” which introduce core concepts and ways of
thinking that cut across the sciences and humanities. These are not 101
classes, meant to impart freshman-level knowledge of subjects. (“The
freshman year [as taught at traditional schools] should not exist,”
Nelson says, suggesting that MOOCs can teach the basics. “Do your
freshman year at home.”) Instead, Minerva’s first-year classes are
designed to inculcate what Nelson calls “habits of mind” and
“foundational concepts,” which are the basis for all sound systematic
thought. In a science class, for example, students should develop a deep
understanding of the need for controlled experiments. In a humanities
class, they need to learn the classical techniques of rhetoric and
develop basic persuasive skills. The curriculum then builds from that
foundation.

“Minerva brings us back to first principles,” says Harry R. Lewis, a
former Harvard dean. What, he asks, does it mean to be educated?

Nelson compares this level of direction favorably with what he found at
Penn (curricular disorder), and with what one finds at Brown (very few
requirements) or Columbia (a “great books” core curriculum). As Minerva
students advance, they choose one of five majors: arts and humanities,
social sciences, computational sciences, natural sciences, or business.

Snapfish sold for $300 million to Hewlett-Packard in 2005, and Nelson
made enough to fund two years of planning for his dream project. He is
prone to bombastic pronouncements about Minerva, making broad claims
about the state of higher education that are at times insightful and at
times speculative at best. He speaks at many conferences, unsettling
academic administrators less radical than he is by blithely dismissing
long-standing practices. “Your cash cow is the lecture, and the lecture
is over,” he told a gathering of deans. “The lecture model ... will be
obliterated.”

In academic circles, where overt competition between institutions is a
serious breach of etiquette, Nelson is a bracing presence. (Imagine the
president of Columbia telling the assembled presidents of other Ivy
League schools, as Nelson sometimes tells his competitors, “Our goal is
not to put you out of business; it is to lead you. It is to show you
that there is a better way to do what you are doing, and for you to
follow us.”)

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures3&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=5)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures3&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=5)

The other taboo Nelson ignores is acknowledgment of profit motive.
“*For-profit*in higher education equates to evil,” Nelson told me,
noting that most for-profit colleges are indeed the sort of disreputable
degree mills that wallpaper the Web with banner ads. “As if nonprofits
aren’t money-driven!” he howled. “They’re just corporations that dodge
their taxes.” (See [“The Law-School
Scam.”](http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/08/the-law-school-scam/375069/))

Minerva is built to make money, but Nelson insists that its motives will
align with student interests. As evidence, Nelson points to the fact
that the school will eschew all federal funding, to which he attributes
much of the runaway cost of universities. The compliance cost of taking
federal financial aid is about $1,000 per student—a tenth of Minerva’s
tuition—and the aid wouldn’t be of any use to the majority of Minerva’s
students, who will likely come from overseas.

Subsidies, Nelson says, encourage universities to enroll even students
who aren’t likely to thrive, and to raise tuition, since federal money
is pegged to costs. These effects pervade higher education, he says, but
they have nothing to do with teaching students. He believes Minerva
would end up hungering after federal money, too, if it ever allowed
itself to be tempted. Instead, like Ulysses, it will tie itself to the
mast and work with private-sector funding only. “If you put a
drug”—federal funds—“into a system, the system changes itself to fit the
drug. If [Minerva] took money from the government, in 20 years we’d be
majority American, with substantially higher tuition. And as much as you
try to create barriers, if you don’t structure it to be
mission-oriented, that’s the way it will evolve.”

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/08/0914_WEL_Wood_Minerva_talking_V1/39b7691d2.jpg)Minerva
CEO Ben Nelson’s first major hire was Stephen M. Kosslyn (right), a
cognitive neuro­scientist and former Harvard dean. (Ike Edeani)

When talking about Minerva’s future, Nelson says he thinks in terms of
the life spans of universities—hundreds of years as opposed to the
decades of typical corporate time horizons. Minerva’s very founding is a
rare event. “We are now building an institution that has not been
attempted in over 100 years, since the founding of Rice”—the last
four-year liberal-arts-based research institution founded in this
country. It opened in 1912 and now charges $53,966 a year.

So far, Minerva has hired its deans, who will teach all the courses for
this inaugural class. It will hire rank-and-file faculty later in the
year. One of Minerva’s main strategies is to lure a few prominent
scholars from existing institutions. Other “new” universities,
especially fantastically wealthy ones like King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology, in Saudi Arabia, have attempted a similar
strategy—at times with an almost cargocult-like confidence that filling
their labs and offices with big-shot professors will turn the
institutions themselves into important players.

Among the bigger shots hired by Minerva is Eric Bonabeau, the dean of
computational sciences, who taught the seminar I participated in.
Bonabeau, a physicist who has worked in academia and in business,
studies the mathematics of swarming behavior (of bees, fish, robots),
and his research helped inspire Michael Crichton’s terrible thriller
*Prey*. Diane Halpern, a prominent psychologist, signed on this year as
the dean of social sciences.

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures4&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=3)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures4&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=3)

Minerva’s first major hire, Stephen M. Kosslyn, is a man I met in the
fall of 1999, when I went to have my head examined. Kosslyn taught
cognitive psychology and neuroscience for 32 years at Harvard, and
during my undergraduate years I visited his lab and earned a few dollars
here and there as one of his guinea pigs. The studies usually involved
sticking my head in an fMRI machine so he and his researchers could
record activity in my brain and observe which parts fired when.

Around that time, Kosslyn’s lab made news because it began to show how
“mental imagery”—the experience of seeing things in your mind’s
eye—really works. (One study involved putting volunteers into fMRI
machines and asking them to hold an image of a cat in their head for as
long as possible. You can try this exercise now. If you’re especially
good at concentrating, the cat might vanish in a matter of a few
seconds, as soon as your brain—distractible as a puppy—comes up with
another object of attention.) Kosslyn served as Harvard’s dean of social
sciences from 2008 to 2010, then spent two years at Stanford as the
director of its Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. In
2013, after a few months of contract work for Minerva, he resigned from
Stanford and joined Minerva as its founding dean.

Kosslyn speaks softly and slowly, with little emotional affect. Bald and
bearded, he has an owlish stare, and at times during my recent
conversations with him, he seemed to be scanning my brain with his eyes.
For purposes of illustration (and perhaps also amusement), he will ask
you to perform some cognitive task, then wait patiently while you do
it—explain a concept, say, or come up with an argument—before telling
you matter-of-factly what your mind just did. When talking with him, you
often feel as though your brain is a machine, and his job is to know how
it works better than it knows itself.

He spent much of his first year at Minerva surveying the literature on
education and the psychology of learning. “We have numerous sound,
reproducible experiments that tell us how people learn, and what
teachers can do to improve learning.” Some of the studies are ancient,
by the standards of scientific research—and yet their lessons are almost
wholly ignored.

For example, he points to a 1972 study by Fergus I. M. Craik and Robert
S. Lockhart in *The Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior*,
which shows that memory of material is enhanced by “deep” cognitive
tasks. In an educational context, such tasks would include working with
material, applying it, arguing about it (rote memorization is
insufficient). The finding is hardly revolutionary, but applying it
systematically in the classroom is. Similarly, research shows that
having a pop quiz at the beginning of a class and (if the students are
warned in advance) another one at a random moment later in the class
greatly increases the durability of what is learned. Likewise, if you
ask a student to explain a concept she has been studying, the very act
of articulating it seems to lodge it in her memory. Forcing students to
guess the answer to a problem, and to discuss their answers in small
groups, seems to make them understand the problem better—even if they
guess wrong.

Kosslyn had powers literally no one at Harvard—even the president—had.
He could tell people what to do, and they had to do it.

Kosslyn has begun publishing his research on the science of learning.
His most recent co-authored article, in *Psychological**Science in the
Public Interest*, argues (against conventional wisdom) that the
traditional concept of “cognitive styles”—visual versus aural learners,
those who learn by doing versus those who learn by studying—is muddled
and wrong.

The pedagogical best practices Kosslyn has identified have been
programmed into the Minerva platform so that they are easy for
professors to apply. They are not only easy, in fact, but also
compulsory, and professors will be trained intensively in how to use the
platform.

This approach does have its efficiencies. In a normal class, a pop quiz
might involve taking out paper and pencils, not to mention eye-rolls
from students. On the Minerva platform, quizzes—often a single
multiple-choice question—are over and done in a matter of seconds, with
students’ answers immediately logged and analyzed. Professors are able
to sort students instantly, and by many metrics, for small-group
work—perhaps pairing poets with business majors, to expose students who
are weak in a particular class to the thought processes of their
stronger peers. Some claim that education is an art and a science.
Nelson has disputed this: “It’s a science and a science.”

Nelson likes to compare this approach to traditional seminars. He says
he spoke to a prominent university president—he wouldn’t say which
one—early in the planning of Minerva, and he found the man’s view of
education, in a word, faith-based. “He said the reason elite university
education was so great was because you take an expert in the subject,
plus a bunch of smart kids, you put them in a room and apply
pressure—and *magic*happens,” Nelson told me, leaning portentously on
that word. “That was his analysis. They’re trying to sell magic!
Something that happens by accident! It sure didn’t happen when I was an
undergrad.”

To Kosslyn, building effective teaching techniques directly into the
platform gives Minerva a huge advantage. “Typically, the way a professor
learns to teach is completely haphazard,” he says. “One day the person
is a graduate student, and the next day, a professor standing up giving
a lecture, with almost no training.” Lectures, Kosslyn says, are
pedagogically unsound, although for universities looking to trim budgets
they are at least cost-effective, with one employee for dozens or
hundreds of tuition-paying students. “A great way to teach,” Kosslyn
says drily, “but a terrible way to learn.”

I asked him whether, at Harvard and Stanford, he attempted to apply any
of the lessons of psychology in the classroom. He told me he could have
alerted colleagues to best practices, but they most likely would have
ignored them. “The classroom time is theirs, and it is sacrosanct,” he
says. The very thought that he might be able to impose his own order on
it was laughable. Professors, especially tenured ones at places like
Harvard, answer to nobody.

It occurred to me that Kosslyn was living the dream of every university
administrator who has watched professors mulishly defy even the most
reasonable directives. Kosslyn had powers literally no one at
Harvard—even the president—had. He could tell people what to do, and
they had to do it.

There were moments, during my various conversations with Kosslyn and
Nelson, when I found I couldn’t wait for Minerva’s wrecking ball to
demolish the ivory tower. The American college system is a frustrating
thing—and I say this as someone who was a satisfied customer of two
undergraduate institutions, Deep Springs College (an obscure but
selective college in the high desert of California) and Harvard. At Deep
Springs, my classes rarely exceeded five students. At Harvard, I went to
many excellent lectures and took only one class with fewer than 10
students. I didn’t sleepwalk or drink my way through either school, and
the education I received was well worth the $16,000 a year my parents
paid, after scholarships.

But the Minerva seminar did bring back memories of many a pointless,
formless discussion or lecture, and it began to seem obvious that if
Harvard had approached teaching with a little more care, it could have
improved the seminars and replaced the worst lectures with something
else.

When Eric Bonabeau assigned the reading for his class on induction, he
barely bothered to tell us what induction was, or how it related to
North Atlantic cod. When I asked him afterward about his decision not to
spend a session introducing the concept, he said the Web had plenty of
tutorials about induction, and any Minerva student ought to be able to
learn the basics on her own time, in her own way. Seminars are for
advanced discussion. And, of course, he was right.

“The reason we can get away with the model we have is because MOOCs
exist. The MOOCs will eventually make lectures obsolete.”

Minerva’s model, Nelson says, will flourish in part because it will
exploit free online content, rather than trying to compete with it, as
traditional universities do. A student who wants an introductory
economics course can turn to Coursera or Khan Academy. “We are a
university, and a MOOC is a version of publishing,” Nelson explains.
“The reason we can get away with the pedagogical model we have is
because MOOCs exist. The MOOCs will eventually make lectures obsolete.”

Indeed, the more I looked into Minerva and its operations, the more I
started to think that certain functions of universities have simply
become less relevant as information has become more ubiquitous. Just as
learning to read in Latin was essential before books became widely
available in other languages, gathering students in places where they
could attend lectures in person was once a necessary part of higher
education. But by now books are abundant, and so are serviceable online
lectures by knowledgeable experts.

On the other hand, no one yet knows whether reducing a university to a
smooth-running pedagogical machine will continue to allow scholarship to
thrive—or whether it will simply put universities out of business,
replace scholar-teachers with just teachers, and retard a whole
generation of research. At any great university, there are faculty who
are terrible at teaching but whose work drives their field forward with
greater momentum than the research of their classroom-competent
colleagues. Will there be a place for such people at Minerva—or
anywhere, if Minerva succeeds?

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures5&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=7)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures5&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=7)

Last spring, when universities began mailing out acceptance letters and
parents all over the country shuddered as the reality of tuition bills
became more concrete, Minerva sent 69 offers. Thirty-three students
decided to enroll, a typical percentage for a liberal-arts school.
Nelson told me Minerva would admit students without regard for diversity
or balance of gender.

Applicants to Minerva take a battery of online quizzes, including
spatial-reasoning tests of the sort one might find on an IQ test. SATs
are not considered, because affluent students can boost their scores by
hiring tutors. (“They’re a good way of determining how rich a student
is,” Nelson says.) If students perform well enough, Minerva interviews
them over Skype and makes them write a short essay during the interview,
to ensure that they aren’t paying a ghost writer. “The top 30 applicants
get in,” he told me back in February, slicing his hand through the air
to mark the cutoff point. For more than three years, he had been
proselytizing worldwide, speaking to highschool students in California
and Qatar and Brazil. In May, he and the Minerva deans made the final
chop.

Of the students who enrolled, slightly less than 20 percent are
American[\*](#note)—a percentage much higher than anticipated. (Nelson
ultimately expects as many as 90 percent of the students to come from
overseas.) Perhaps not surprisingly, the students come
disproportionately from unconventional backgrounds— nearly one-tenth are
from United World Colleges, the chain of cosmopolitan hippie high
schools that brings together students from around the globe in places
like Wales, Singapore, and New Mexico.

In an oddly controlling move for a university, Minerva asked admitted
students to run requests for media interviews by its public-relations
department. But the university gave me the names of three students
willing to speak.

“That’s what Minerva is offering: an experience that lets you live
multiple lives and learn not just your concentration but how to think.”

When I got through to Ian Van Buskirk of Marietta, Georgia, he was eager
to tell me about a dugout canoe that he had recently carved out of a
two-ton oak log, using only an ax, an adze, and a chisel, and that he
planned to take on a maiden voyage in the hour after our conversation.
He told me he would have attended Duke University if Minerva hadn’t come
calling, but he said it wasn’t a particularly difficult decision, even
though Minerva lacks the prestige and 176-year history of Duke. “There’s
no reputation out there,” he told me. “But that means we get to make the
reputation ourselves. I’m creating it now, while I’m talking to you.”

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures6&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=4)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures6&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=4)

Minerva had let him try out the same online platform I did, and Van
Buskirk singled out the “level of interaction and intensity” as a reason
for attending. “It took deep concentration,” he said. “It’s not some
lecture class where you can just click ‘record’ on your tape.” He said
the focus required was similar to the mind-set he’d needed when he made
his first hacks into his oak log, which could have cracked, rendering it
useless.

Another student, Shane Dabor, of the small city of Brantford, Ontario,
had planned to attend Canada’s University of Waterloo or the University
of Toronto. But his experiences with online learning and a series of
internships had led him to conclude that traditional universities were
not for him. “I already had lots of friends at university who weren’t
learning anything,” he says. “Both options seemed like a wager, and I
chose this one.”

A young Palestinian woman, Rana Abu Diab, of Silwan, in East Jerusalem,
described how she had learned English through movies and books (a
translation of the Norwegian philosophical novel *Sophie’s World*was a
particular favorite). “If I had relied on my school, I would not be able
to have a two-minute conversation,” she told me in fluent English.
During a year studying media at Birzeit University, in Ramallah, she
heard about Minerva and decided to scrap her other academic plans and
focus on applying there. For her, the ability to study overseas on
multiple continents, and get an American-style liberalarts education in
the process, was irresistible. “I want to explore everything and learn
everything,” she says. “And that’s what Minerva is offering: an
experience that lets you live multiple lives and learn not just your
concentration but how to think.” Minerva admitted her, and, like a third
of her classmates in the founding class, she received a supplemental
scholarship, which she could use to pay for her computer and health
insurance.

Two students told me that they had felt a little trepidation, and a need
to convince themselves or their parents that Minerva wasn’t just a
moneymaking scheme. Minerva had an open house weekend for admitted
students, and (perhaps ironically) the in-person interactions with
Minerva faculty and staff helped assure them that the university was
legit. The students all now say they’re confident in Minerva—although of
course they can leave whenever they like, with little lost but time.

Some****people consider universities sacred places, and they might even
see professors’ freedom to be the fallible sovereigns of their own
classrooms as a necessary part of what makes a university special. To
these romantics, universities are havens from a world dominated by
orthodoxy, money, and quotidian concerns. Professors get to think
independently, and students come away molded by the total
experience—classes, social life, extracurriculars—that the university
provides. We spend the rest of our lives chasing mates, money, and jobs,
but at university we enjoy the liberty to indulge aimless curiosity in
subjects we know nothing about, for purposes unrelated to efficiency or
practicality.

Minerva is too young to have attracted zealous naysayers, but it’s safe
to assume that the people with this disposition toward the university
experience are least likely to be enthusiastic about Minerva and other
attempts to revolutionize education through technical innovation. MOOCs
are beloved by those too poor for a traditional university, as well as
those who like to dabble, and those who like to learn in their pajamas.
And MOOCs are not to be knocked: for a precocious Malawian peasant girl
who learns math through free lessons from Khan Academy, the new Web
resources can change her life. But the dropout rate for online classes
is about 95 percent, and they skew strongly toward quantitative
disciplines, particularly computer science, and toward privileged male
students. As Nelson is fond of pointing out, however, MOOCs will
continue to get better, until eventually no one will pay Duke or Johns
Hopkins for the possibility of a good lecture, when Coursera offers a
reliably great one, with hundreds of thousands of five-star ratings, for
free.

“Plutarch said the mind is not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be
lit. Part of my worry about these Internet start-ups is that it’s not
clear they’ll be any good at the fire-lighting part.”

The question remains as to whether Minerva can provide what traditional
universities offer now. Kosslyn’s project of efficiently cramming
learning into students’ brains is preferable to failing to cram in
anything at all. And it is designed to convey not just information, as
most MOOCs seem to, but whole mental tool kits that help students become
morethoughtful citizens. But defenders of the traditional university see
efficiency as a false idol.

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures7&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=4)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dboxfeatures7&sz=300x250%7C300x600&c=857697270&tile=4)

“Like other things that are going on now in higher ed, Minerva brings us
back to first principles,” says Harry R. Lewis, a computer-science
professor who was the dean of Harvard’s undergraduate college from 1995
to 2003. What, he asks, does it mean to be educated? Perhaps the process
of education is a profound one, involving all sorts of leaps in maturity
that do not show up on a Kosslyn-style test of pedagogical efficiency.
“I’m sure there’s a market for people who want to be more efficiently
educated,” Lewis says. “But how do you improve the efficiency of growing
up?”

He warns that online-education innovations tend to be oversold. “They
seem to want to re-create the School of Athens in every little hamlet on
the prairie—and maybe they’ll do that,” he told me. “But part of the
process of education happens not just through good pedagogy but by
having students in places where they see the scholars working and plying
their trades.”

He calls the “hydraulic metaphor” of education—the idea that the main
task of education is to increase the flow of knowledge into the
student—an “old fallacy.” As Lewis explains, “Plutarch said the mind is
not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be lit. Part of my worry about
these Internet start-ups is that it’s not clear they’ll be any good at
the fire-lighting part.”

In February, at a university-administrator conference at a Hyatt in
downtown San Francisco, Ben Nelson spoke to a plenary session of
business-school deans from around the world. Daphne Koller of Coursera
sat opposite him onstage, and they calmly but assuredly described what
sounded to me like the destruction of the very schools where their
audience members worked. Nelson wore a bored smirk while an introductory
video played, advertising the next year’s version of the same
conference. To a pair of educational entrepreneurs boasting the low
price of their new projects, the slickly produced video must have looked
like just another expensive barnacle on the hull of higher education.

“Content is about to become free and ubiquitous,” Koller said, an
especially worrying comment for deans who still thought the job of their
universities was to teach “content.” The institutions “that are going to
survive are the ones that reimagine themselves in this new world.”

Even if Minerva turns out not to be the venture that upends American
higher education, other innovators will crop up in its wake.

Nelson ticked off the advantages he had over legacy institutions: the
spryness of a well-funded start-up, a student body from all over the
world, and deals for faculty (they get to keep their own intellectual
property, rather than having to hand over lucrative patents to, say,
Stanford) that are likely to make Minerva attractive.

Yet in some ways, the worst possible outcome would be for U.S. higher
education to accept Minerva as its model and dismantle the old
universities before anyone can really be sure that it offers a
satisfactory replacement. During my conversations with the three Minerva
students, I wanted to ask whether they were confident Minerva would give
them all the wonderful intangibles and productive diversions that Harry
Lewis found so important. But then I remembered what I was like as a
teenager headed off to college, so ignorant of what college was and what
it could be, and so reliant on the college itself to provide what I’d
need in order to get a good education. These three young students were
more resourceful than I was, and probably more deliberate in their
choice of college. But they were newcomers to higher education, and
asking them whether their fledgling alma mater could provide these
things seemed akin to asking the passengers on the *Mayflower*how they
liked America as soon as their feet touched Plymouth Rock.

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures8&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=7)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures8&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=7)

Lewis is certainly right when he says that Minerva challenges the field
to return to first principles. But of course the conclusions one reaches
might not be flattering to traditional colleges. One possibility is that
Minerva will fail because a college degree, for all the high-minded talk
of liberal education— of lighting fires and raising thoughtful
citizens—is really just a credential, or an entry point to an old-boys
network that gets you your first job and your first lunch with the
machers at your alumni club. Minerva has no alumni club, and if it fails
for this reason, it will look naive and idealistic, a bet on the
inherent value of education in a world where cynicism gets better odds.

In another sense, it’s difficult to imagine Minerva failing altogether:
it will offer something that resembles a liberal education to large
segments of the Earth’s population who currently have to choose between
the long-shot possibility of getting into a traditional U.S. school, and
the more narrowly career-oriented education available in their home
country. That population might give Minerva a steady flow of
tuition-paying warm bodies even if U.S. higher education ignores it
completely. It could plausibly become the Amherst of the world beyond
the borders of the United States.

These are not, however, the terms by which Ben Nelson defines success.
To him, the brass ring is for Minerva to force itself on the
consciousness of the Yales and Swarthmores and “lead” American
universities into a new era. More modestly, we can expect Minerva to
force some universities to justify what previously could be waved off
with mentions of “magic” and a puff of smoke. Its seminar platform will
challenge professors to stop thinking they’re using technology just
because they lecture with PowerPoint.

It seems only remotely possible that in 20 years Minerva could have more
students enrolled than Ohio State will. But it is almost a certainty
that the classrooms of elite universities will in that time have come to
look more and more like Minerva classrooms, with professors and students
increasingly separated geographically, mediated through technology that
alters the nature of the student-teacher relationship. Even if Minerva
turns out not to be the venture that upends American higher education,
other innovators will crop up in its wake to address the exact
weaknesses Nelson now attacks. The idea that college will in two decades
look exactly as it does today increasingly sounds like the forlorn,
fingers-crossed hope of a higher-education dinosaur that retirement
comes before extinction.

At the university-administrator conference where Nelson spoke in
February, I sat at a table with an affable bunch of deans from Australia
and the United States. They listened attentively, first with interest
and then with growing alarm. Toward the end of the conversation, the
sponsoring organization’s president asked the panelists what they
expected to be said at a similar event in 2017, on the same topic of
innovative online education. (“Assuming we’re still in business,” a dean
near me whispered to no one in particular.)

Daphne Koller said she expected Coursera to have grown in offerings into
a university the size of a large state school—after having started from
scratch in 2012. Even before Nelson gave his answer, I noticed some
audience members uncomfortably shifting their weight. The stench of fear
made him bold.

“I predict that in three years, four or five or seven or eight of you
will be onstage here, presenting your preliminary findings of your first
year of a radical new conception of your undergraduate [or] graduate
program ... And the rest of you will look at two or three of those
versions and say, ‘Uh-oh.’ ” This was meant as a joke, but hardly anyone
laughed.

* * * * *

**[Note](#*):**The online version has been changed to reflect additional
information about the composition of Minerva’s inaugural class, provided
by Minerva after the magazine went to press.

-   [Facebook](#)
-   [Twitter](#)
-   [LinkedIn](#)
-   [Google+](#)
-   [Email](mailto:?subject=The%20Atlantic:%20The%20Future%20of%20College%3F%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20&body=A%20brash%20tech%20entrepreneur%20thinks%20he%20can%20reinvent%20higher%20education%20by%20stripping%20it%20down%20to%20its%20essence%2C%20eliminating%20lectures%20and%20tenure%20along%20with%20football%20games%2C%20ivy-covered%20buildings%2C%20and%20research%20libraries.%20What%20if%20he%27s%20right%3F%C2%A0%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%0A%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20Read%20this:%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/08/the-future-of-college/375071/)
-   [Comments](#disqus_thread)

-   ![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/authors/w/graeme-wood/headshot/author-headshot.jpg?502c0948)
    Graeme Wood is a contributing editor at *The Atlantic*. His personal
    site is [gcaw.net](http://www.gcaw.net/).
    -   [All Posts](/graeme-wood/)
    -   [Follow @gcaw](https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=gcaw)

Most Popular on The Atlantic
----------------------------

-   [![The Killing of Kajieme Powell and How It Divides
    Americans](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/popodivide/thumb_wide.jpg)
    The Killing of Kajieme Powell and How It Divides
    Americans](http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/08/the-killing-of-kajieme-powell/378899/)
-   [![The Twilight of Antonin
    Scalia](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/RTX15KCS/thumb_wide.jpg)
    The Twilight of Antonin
    Scalia](http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/08/the-twilight-of-antonin-scalia/378884/)
-   [![Self-Segregation: Why It's So Hard for Whites to Understand
    Ferguson](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/RTR42R0G/thumb_wide.jpg)
    Self-Segregation: Why It's So Hard for Whites to Understand
    Ferguson](http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/08/self-segregation-why-its-hard-for-whites-to-understand-ferguson/378928/)
-   [![Where the Five-Day Workweek Came
    From](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/8654957481_1e8d42b6ee_o_1/thumb_wide.jpg)
    Where the Five-Day Workweek Came
    From](http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2014/08/where-the-five-day-workweek-came-from/378870/)

-   [CityLab](/)
-   [Share](#)
-   [Tweet](#)
-   [Menu](#)

Follow The Atlantic
===================

-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/TheAtlantic)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/TheAtlantic)
-   [LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/today/theatlantic.com)
-   [Google +](https://plus.google.com/109258622984321091629/posts)
-   [RSS](/follow-the-atlantic/#rssFeeds)
-   [App Store](http://wda.biz/mrmxub)
-   [Play
    Store](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.theatlantic.weekly_android)

E-Newsletters
=============

-   Today's Top Stories
-   This Week
-   This Month
-   New at In Focus
-   CityLab: Today’s Top Stories
-   CityLab: This Week’s Most Popular Stories
-   5 Best Columns
-   Today’s Top News from The Wire
-   Top Videos of the Week

I want to receive updates from partners and sponsors.

About The Atlantic
==================

-   [FAQ](/faq/)
-   [Store](/store/)
-   [Atlantic Media](http://atlanticmedia.com/)
-   [Advertise](http://advertising.theatlantic.com/)
-   [Site Map](/site-map/)
-   [Masthead](/masthead/)
-   [Emporium](/emporium/)
-   [Jobs](/jobs/)
-   [Advertising Guidelines](/advertise/)
-   [Terms and Conditions](/terms-and-conditions/)
-   [Contact Us](/contact/)
-   [Atlantic Scene](/atlantic-scene/)
-   [Press](/press/)
-   [Privacy](/privacy-policy/)

Subscribe
=========

[Subscribe Help](https://ssl.palmcoastd.com/23301/apps/CSMAIN)

[Fraud
Alert](/personal/archive/2013/10/fraud-alert-regarding-i-the-atlantic-i/280278/)

Get 10 issues a year at 65% off the cover price, plus unlimited digital
access.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/issues/2014/08/13/0914_Cover/medium.jpg)

State AK AL AR AZ CA CO CT DC DE FL GA HI IA ID IL IN KS KY LA MA MD ME
MI MN MO MS MT NC ND NE NH NJ NM NV NY OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VA
VT WA WI WV WY YT Next

Copyright © 2014 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights Reserved.

[CDN](http://www.edgecast.com/) powered by Edgecast Networks. Insights
powered by [Parsely](http://www.parsely.com/)

The Atlantic

Continue ()

Advertisement

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6463921&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![image](//www.bizographics.com/collect/?pid=1016&fmt=gif)

[Powered by the Parse.ly Publisher Platform (P3).](http://parsely.com)

![image](//search.spotxchange.com/track/tag/7319.4514/img)

![image](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1407501962855831&ev=NoScript)

'); $('body').append($script); }

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/08/the-future-of-college/375071/
