[Skip to Main Content](#mainContent)

[![subnav
toggle](http://media.npr.org/chrome/subnav_toggle.png)](#sidebar)
[![NPR](http://media.npr.org/chrome/news/nprlogo_138x46.gif)](/)

[Toggle search](#)

-   [Stations](/templates/stations/stations/)
-   [Donate](/stations/donate/index.php)
-   [Shop](http://shop.npr.org)
-   [Sign In/Register](/templates/reg/login.php)
-   -   [Logout](/templates/reg/logout.php)

-   Topics
    -   [News](/sections/news/)
    -   [U.S.](/sections/us/)
    -   [World](/sections/world/)
    -   [Politics](/sections/politics/)
    -   [Business](/sections/business/)
    -   [Technology](/sections/technology/)
    -   [Science](/sections/science/)
    -   [Health](/sections/health/)
    -   [Race & Culture](/blogs/codeswitch/)

    -   [Arts & Life](/sections/arts/)
    -   [Movies](/sections/movies/)
    -   [Pop Culture](/sections/pop-culture/)
    -   [Food](/sections/food/)
    -   [Art & Design](/sections/art-design/)
    -   [Performing Arts](/sections/performing-arts/)
    -   [Photography](/blogs/pictureshow)

    -   [Books](/books/)
    -   [Book Reviews](/sections/book-reviews/)
    -   [Author Interviews](/sections/author-interviews/)

    -   [Music](/music/)
    -   [First Listen](/series/98679384/first-listen/)
    -   [Music Articles](/series/100920965/music-articles/)
    -   [Studio Sessions](/series/15667984/favorite-sessions/)
    -   [Videos](/sections/music-videos/)

-   Programs
    -   News and Conversations
    -   [Morning Edition](/programs/morning-edition/)
    -   [All Things Considered](/programs/all-things-considered/)
    -   [Fresh Air](/programs/fresh-air/)
    -   [Here & Now](http://hereandnow.wbur.org/)
    -   [The Diane Rehm Show](http://thedianerehmshow.org)
    -   [Latino USA](/programs/latino-usa/)
    -   [On The Media](http://www.onthemedia.org)
    -   [On Point](http://www.onpointradio.org/)
    -   [Weekend Edition Saturday](/programs/weekend-edition-saturday/)
    -   [Weekend Edition Sunday](/programs/weekend-edition-sunday/)

    -   Storytelling & Humor
    -   [Ask Me Another](/programs/ask-me-another/)
    -   [Car Talk](http://www.cartalk.com)
    -   [Radiolab](http://www.radiolab.org)
    -   [Snap Judgment](/programs/snap-judgment/)
    -   [StoryCorps](http://storycorps.org)
    -   [TED Radio Hour](/programs/ted-radio-hour/)
    -   [Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!](/programs/wait-wait-dont-tell-me/)

    -   Music
    -   [All Songs Considered](/programs/all-songs-considered/)
    -   [Alt.Latino](/series/alt-latino/)
    -   [First Listen](/series/98679384/first-listen/)
    -   [Metropolis](/blogs/metropolis/)
    -   [Microphone Check](/blogs/microphonecheck/)
    -   [Mountain Stage](/series/mountain-stage/)
    -   [From The Top](http://www.fromthetop.org/)
    -   [JazzSet](/programs/jazzset/)
    -   [Piano Jazz](/programs/piano-jazz/)
    -   [Song Travels](/series/150560513/song-travels/)
    -   [The Thistle &
        Shamrock](/series/103063413/the-thistle-and-shamrock/)
    -   [World Cafe](/programs/world-cafe/)

-   [Listen](/listen/)

[![NPR logo](http://media.npr.org/chrome/subnav_toggle.png)](#sidebar)
[![NPR](http://media.npr.org/chrome/news/nprlogo_138x46.gif)](/)

[![NPR
Ed](http://media.npr.org/branding/blogs/ed/branding_main-26dba67f23631d4ed64795d9900894e1ee3639af.png)HOW
LEARNING HAPPENS](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/)

[Common Core](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/317047120/common-core)

In Kentucky, Moving Beyond Dependence On Tests
==============================================

by Anya Kamenetz

June 01, 2014 9:08 AM ET

The white, split-rail fences of horse farms line the two-lane road that
takes you southwest from Lexington. It's a beautiful half-hour drive to
Danville, Ky.

Settled in 1783, the town is proud of its history. In Constitution
Square, across Main Street from Burke's Bakery, sits a tiny log cabin
that was once the first post office west of the Allegheny Mountains.

![A school in Danville, Ky., has become a national
exemplar.](http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/05/30/20140326_134959-2a419b0e8f2ccf85a4a99657507e5441d6f0847b-s2-c85.jpg "A school in Danville, Ky., has become a national exemplar.")
[i](# "Enlarge") [i](# "Enlarge")

A school in Danville, Ky., has become a national exemplar. **Anya
Kamenetz/NPR** ****hide caption****

**i**toggle caption**** Anya Kamenetz/NPR

A school in Danville, Ky., has become a national exemplar.

Anya Kamenetz/NPR

A few minutes away, Bate Middle School is a more mundane '70s-era,
red-brick building. But what's happening inside is anything but mundane.
I've driven the 37 miles from Lexington to see one of the most closely
watched efforts in the country to change the way schools assess student
learning. Principal Amy Swann and the district's superintendent, Carmen
Coleman, have completely overhauled their school's educational
philosophy, moving away from standardized tests toward an approach
called performance-based assessment.

Kentucky was the first state in the nation to adopt the Common Core and
the tests that align with it. This spring, the 1,700-student Danville
district thinks it's found a better way to teach the Core.

On a Wednesday afternoon in late March, I am waiting in the whitewashed
hallway outside Diania Henderson's seventh-grade science class to see
performance assessment in action. The seventh-graders are sporting
dresses, jackets and ties. When the end-of-day bell rings, they file
into the basement cafeteria, quiet and tense, with only a few poking
each other in the sides, for a snack of cheese crackers and Capri Suns.
It is the day of the Science and Math Performance-Based Assessments, or,
as everyone calls them, the PBATs.

The whole seventh grade spreads out in small groups across the school
building. Most of them are toting three-sided posterboards, like you
might remember from middle school. But over the next two hours, as dusk
gathers outside, it becomes clear that this is no ordinary science fair.

Charlie Hall/YouTube

"The Case of the Hungry Hound," a student project for the science and
math Performance-Based Assessments at Bate Middle School.

The entire curriculum at this school has been redesigned around
interdisciplinary projects, which take several weeks to complete. The
English and social studies seventh-grade PBATs were group projects that
took place in the fall.

One by one, the students stand and give a 20-minute solo presentation
with a PowerPoint or video. Separately, they've handed in 15-page
research papers. They're giving these presentations to panels of judges
made up of teachers from other grades or the high school, officials from
a neighboring district, education students from the University of
Kentucky, and fellow students.

![Charlie Hall with his dog Rosie, the subject of his science
project.](http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/05/30/untitled-aaa6e23f1be4aad825c4825c0acd0cc72d0c931c-s2-c85.jpg "Charlie Hall with his dog Rosie, the subject of his science project.")

Charlie Hall with his dog Rosie, the subject of his science project.
**Charlie Hall** ****hide caption****

**i**toggle caption**** Charlie Hall

When it's his turn, apple-cheeked Charlie Hall explains how he was able
to lower the heartbeat of his Doberman, Rosie, and stop her from wolfing
down her food by petting and talking to her.

Claire Strysick, with her hair in a neat bun, speaks about the impact of
oil spills and presents the results of a chemical analysis of aquarium
water polluted with petroleum.

A special education student and aspiring chef earns the top mark of
"Outstanding" for a detailed presentation on surface tension and various
seasonings.

I watch as student after student confidently answers questions about the
steps of the scientific method, experimental design, math concepts like
mean and median, and, most impressively, how the project relates to his
or her life. And they listen respectfully to each other, giving helpful
feedback.

Most projects are graded "outstanding" or "competent."**A few are judged
"needs revision," which means the students will keep working on them
until they pass muster.

There is high-level learning on display here, from the math and science
content to independent research and public speaking skills. Yet Bate
isn't some gifted school. Of the 400 students, 69 percent qualify for
free and reduced lunch, and 38 percent are members of minority groups.
About a fifth are in special ed.

**Schools Can Do Better**

Five years ago, when Carmen Coleman took over as superintendent, Bate
Middle School was on the state "watch list" because of its low test
scores. The state commissioner even made a surprise visit to the school
to decide whether to shut it down.

And so in the fall of 2011, Coleman asked her friend from graduate
school at the University of Kentucky to take over as principal. "She
didn't say, 'Come take over my worst school,' " Swann recalls with a
laugh. "But I just saw amazing teachers and kids."

Swann got right to work, reorganizing the staff, introducing
project-based learning and setting expectations with a "Danville
diploma" that included social and emotional skills, ethics,
technological literacy, career readiness. In 2013, the school was
designated an ["exemplar school" by the Partnership for 21st Century
Skills](http://www.p21.org/exemplar-program-case-studies), one of just
25 in the nation.

"There's maybe 10 people around the country who really understand how to
demonstrate authentic learning through student work, and two of them are
in Kentucky," says [Tom Vander
Ark](http://gettingsmart.com/about/tom-vander-ark/), an author and
former schools superintendent who has written extensively on school
improvement.

What makes the Danville experiment particularly noteworthy is that
Kentucky was out ahead of the nation on adoption of the [Common Core
State
Standards](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/05/27/307755798/the-common-core-faq)for
English and math. Swann believes the standards are worthwhile, but
thinks schools can do better than the tests that go with them. Though
the new Common Core tests have been [touted as
improvements](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/04/09/299073572/an-education-reporter-puts-himself-to-the-standardized-test)over
what they replaced, she says they are really "the same old multiple
choice," and adds, "I feel like on a standardized test you're really
showing what kids don't know."

Swann and Coleman started looking for alternatives. Together, they
visited award-winning schools all over the country, such as [Big Picture
Learning,](http://www.bigpicture.org/) an international network of over
100 schools that focus on individual passions, and [High Tech
High,](http://www.hightechhigh.org/) a school in New Jersey that uses
computers in every class.

They were most impressed with a group of 39 schools in New York state
called the [Performance Standards
Consortium.](http://performanceassessment.org/) Since 1997, these public
schools have been exempt from state standardized tests. Instead of
working from textbooks, students in performance schools create research
projects, both solo and in groups, and present them for detailed
feedback.

Students in these schools produce documentary films. They research
position papers on immigration policy, conduct scientific studies of
visual perception, and create mathematics puzzles.

"It makes a big difference if kids are doing something that they care
about," says Ann Cook, the leader of the consortium and founder of Urban
Academy Laboratory High School,**a Manhattan public school in the
consortium. According to the most recent data available, Consortium
schools in New York City have a dropout rate that's less than half the
city's — [5.3 percent compared with 11.8
percent](http://www.nyclu.org/files/releases/testing_consortium_report.pdf).
And these students also perform better in college.

**From New York To Kentucky**

In October of 2012, Swann traveled to New York to see a "moderation
study," where teachers at different performance schools get together to
review each others' assignments and examples of students' work. This is
yet another way in which performance teachers collaborate and solicit
feedback to improve the quality of teaching and learning.

One assignment in particular captured Swann's attention. "The teacher
asked the students to design an amusement park ride. They had all the
math in there, and physics, and it just really sparked something in me:
that math doesn't have to be this boring class with lectures and
standardized tests. I said, 'Let's take this back to Danville.' "

When she got back from New York that fall, Swann held an all-hands staff
meeting in the school library. "I said, 'What if we designed a whole new
assessment system?' They said, 'That's not possible.' " Swann described
all the exciting teaching and learning she'd seen in New York. "They
said, 'We like this better than the regular tests. We'll be behind you.'
"

Swann asked for an anonymous vote on the new plan, and 98 percent said
yes.

A bill to allow Danville to skip the state tests unanimously passed the
House in April of this year but was shot down in the Senate. The state
Department of Education says discussions to find alternatives are
ongoing. Regardless of what happens, the district will still give the
ACT and its practice tests in 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th grades. (ACT
scores are tied to scholarship money for public university students in
Kentucky, and the nationally recognized test will help them benchmark
student learning.)

But the yearly grind of prepping for weeks for state tests is over for
now. Swann says it's making a big difference in what teachers do every
day, especially in their ability to tailor instruction to each student's
needs and interests.

With standardized tests, she says, "from August to April I have to cover
this content, and it doesn't matter if the kid is all the way up here, I
have to pull them back down to review what they already know. And for
the low-scoring kids, if I rush them through everything, they'll have a
better chance of guessing it on the test. Everything with school ranking
and teacher ranking is based on the tests, when instruction should be
based on reaching the individual student and moving them forward."

Walk into a classroom at Bate and you can see students discussing their
work together in small groups, clustered around a book or computer. The
teachers circulate, ready to help where needed, or pull out a student to
work one-on-one.

Kathy Merryman, the president of the Parent-Teacher Organization, has
seen the evolution as her two children moved through Bate. I meet her in
the hallway before the seventh grade PBATs, where she is helping a
nervous student in a plaid shirt and bow tie rehearse his presentation.

"Every teacher on the staff is here for these kids," Merryman says, "and
they are here till 6 o'clock tonight. And any teacher is willing to help
out anyone who has a question. And they've all embraced
performance-based learning, from the most traditional teacher to the
most nontraditional teacher."

"I have never worked in a school before where the teachers are all on
board with one concept and one idea," agrees Larry Ebert, a special
education teacher. "Our goals are the same, and it's all about what's
best for the kids. It really does take that collaborative aspect in
order for the students to succeed."

**Assessing Performance Assessment**

Performance assessment has had a small, passionate group of supporters
going back decades, especially among self-described progressive
educators who think standardized tests are too blunt and too
one-dimensional to measure the full range of how students learn.

It's related to two more widespread approaches: project-based learning
and portfolios. Projects, like the familiar science fair, are usually a
special add-on to the regular curriculum. Portfolios, which you may
remember from art or creative writing class, seek to give a richer,
multidimensional picture of students' capabilities by assembling a body
of work.

These approaches allow students to follow their own interests and lean
into their strengths. They are usually graded with a rubric, not a
percentile. They address skills like presentation, communication, and
teamwork that are common in the workplace but not part of most
traditional schooling—or state-mandated testing.

On top of all that, performance assessment focuses on demonstrations of
learning to outside evaluators. Students get a "reality check" by taking
their learning before members of the community, and teachers who haven't
taught them.

The experiment at Bate takes this approach a step further by making
performance assessment the cornerstone of the entire curriculum.

Of course, there are reasons U.S. schools have gravitated toward
standardized tests instead. They're (relatively) cheap, easily
administered, and they carry the promise of some kind of "objective"
measure. In other words, they're "standardized."

Performance assessment is the opposite of all that, and that is one
reason it hasn't become widespread. With all its potential, performance
assessment does set a very high bar for teachers and school leaders.

"To embrace projects and performance assessment as the core pedagogical
approach is obviously a gigantic shift," says Vander Ark. Even Cook, the
head of the consortium in New York, agrees that it's "not necessarily
for everybody."

In fact, Kentucky itself implemented a statewide high-stakes assessment
system in 1992 called "KIRIS," that included student portfolios of work,
performance tasks, and tests featuring open-ended questions. A [1996
report by an outside
consultant](http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1014.html)
found that teachers and principals thought the system was good for
instruction and raised expectations for students, but was burdensome and
stressful to put in place. In 1998, the state dropped it.

![The Danville Diploma is part of a new approach to learning at the
school.](http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/05/30/20140326_144243-c5bdbf10fabdf4400fd9e36ec6b6382afb07da57-s2-c85.jpg "The Danville Diploma is part of a new approach to learning at the school.")
[i](# "Enlarge") [i](# "Enlarge")

The Danville Diploma is part of a new approach to learning at the
school. **Anya Kamenetz/NPR** ****hide caption****

**i**toggle caption**** Anya Kamenetz/NPR

The Danville Diploma is part of a new approach to learning at the
school.

Anya Kamenetz/NPR

However, as disquiet with standardized testing has grown, there's been a
corresponding rise in interest in performance assessment. Supporters see
it as an antidote that can be rigorous and address 21st century skills
while also engaging students.

The chief state school officers in Kentucky and eight other states have
formed a group known as the [Innovation Lab
Network.](http://www.ccsso.org/What_We_Do/Innovation_Lab_Network.html)
These states have adopted performance-based learning as one of their
"critical attributes" for a successful school. (The other states are
California, Iowa, Maine, New Hampshire, Ohio, Oregon, West Virginia and
Wisconsin.)

Several of these states are moving to include a performance-assessment
option in public schools. Vermont is taking similar steps, and there is
a [New England Secondary School Consortium](http://newenglandssc.org/)
of 400 high schools using it as well.

With performance assessment taking root in Danville, Swann and Coleman
are now moving on to expand it to more places.

Coleman has left the Danville district to take a**position at the
University of Kentucky's [National Center for Innovation in
Education,](http://uknow.uky.edu/content/national-center-innovation-education)
where she hopes to oversee the founding of a performance-standards
consortium like the one in New York. A neighboring district, Trigg, has
expressed interest in joining Danville in giving up state tests.

"We need to make a gigantic shift," says Coleman, echoing Vander Ark.
"Our kids are getting shortchanged because we're trapped in this rat
race of preparing for assessments."

Amy Swann, meanwhile, has taken a new job as Chief Learning Officer at a
national organization called [Matchbook
Learning](http://www.matchbooklearning.com/organization/our-team/dr.-amy-swann/),
based in Atlanta. She will be working to turn around more
bottom-five-percent "watch list" schools in Detroit, Newark, and soon
possibly in New Orleans and other cities.

**'Who Bubbles In Answers At Their Job?'**

While there's no data yet on how the approach is working in Danville,
support for the idea in the schools and the community is high*.*

“ "Let's get this straight — who is going to be bubbling in answers at
their job? No one."

- Charlie Hall

Twelve-year-old Charlie Hall proves an excellent spokesperson for what's
happening in his school. "I liked school before, but now that we've
taken this initiative into project-based learning, I really, really like
it," he says over Skype from his living room.

Growing up with his mother and stepfather in Danville, Charlie has
always been a good student, cheerful and independent. Besides playing
with his dog Rosie, he likes playing soccer and making videos in his
spare time. His PBAT project, on Rosie's heart rate, included an
astonishingly slick video, complete with soundtrack, that his mother
says he shot and edited all by himself.

"Before, we would take tests like every single day and write long
answers," he explains. "So the transition from that really tight
monotonous structure to a very free-flowing environment in the classroom
might be a little different at first."

But he says he sees a huge payoff in the long term.

"Let's get this straight — who is going to be bubbling in answers at
their job? No one," he says, sounding like just the kind of engaged,
motivated learner that Danville is trying to produce. "We're getting
skills that we're actually going to need later on in life. It's really
cool."

##### Correction June 2, 2014

An earlier version of this story and its headline incorrectly stated
that the Danville Independent School District had received permission
from the state to skip the state tests this spring. In fact, the state
did not give that permission and the district continues to administer
the state tests.

-   [Share](#)
    -   [Facebook](javascript:void(0);)
    -   [Twitter](javascript:void(0);)
    -   [Google+](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.npr.org%2Fblogs%2Fed%2F2014%2F06%2F01%2F317433695%2Fin-kentucky-students-succeed-without-tests%3Futm_campaign%3Dstoryshare%26utm_source%3Dplus.google.com%26utm_medium%3Dsocial)
    -   [Email](javascript:void(0);)

-   [Comment](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/06/01/317433695/in-kentucky-students-succeed-without-tests#commentBlock)

[Is The Deck Stacked Against Black Boys In America?May 30,
2014](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/05/30/317428231/is-the-deck-stacked-against-black-boys-in-america)
[Reaching Immigrant Children By Helping Their ParentsJune 2,
2014](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/06/02/318204219/reaching-immigrant-children-by-helping-their-parents)

#### More From NPR Ed

[](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/08/20/341668003/a-tale-of-two-polls)

Education
---------

### A Tale Of Two Polls

![Tug-of-war](http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/08/19/edblog_commoncorepolls_sq-4e3d7a5d049184cee8b344eae0910e95a7ec6024.png?s=16)

[](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/08/17/340412133/why-the-atlanta-testing-scandal-matters)

Education
---------

### Why The Atlanta Testing Scandal Matters

![One study found that teachers under high-stakes testing spent more
time teaching "bubble kids" who were close to passing, at the expense of
students elsewhere on the bell
curve.](http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/08/16/bubblekids_sq-2a4070ace09ceb67cd9a9d51a4de8e31de5cb7bf.png?s=16)

[](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/08/15/340394980/helping-students-make-sense-of-a-young-black-mans-death-in-missouri)

Education
---------

### Helping Students Make Sense Of A Young Black Man's Death In Missouri

![Jeremiah Parker, 4, stands in front of his mother, Shatara Parker, as
they attend a protest in Ferguson, Mo. Nights of unrest have vied with
calls for calm in the St. Louis suburb where Michael Brown, an unarmed
black teenager, was killed by
police.](http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/08/14/ap243785997120_sq-22aa82417773cc61db68bfa09b3e1816d792524d.jpg?s=16)

[](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/08/14/339822646/the-npr-ed-mailbag-the-participation-trophy)

Education
---------

### The NPR Ed Mailbag: The Participation Trophy

![Mail's
here!](http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2014/08/13/npred_mailbagillo1_sq-fe998b8f3c4c70f8d51ee16239220a53dbbeadfb.png?s=16)

[More From NPR Ed](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/)

### [Comments](#)

##### You must be signed in to leave a comment. [Sign In / Register](/templates/reg/login.php?returnUrl=%2Fblogs%2Fed%2F2014%2F06%2F01%2F317433695%2Fin-kentucky-students-succeed-without-tests%23commentBlock)

Please keep your community civil. All comments must follow the [NPR.org
Community rules](http://npr.org/discussionrules) and [Terms of
Use](http://www.npr.org/about/termsofuse.html). NPR reserves the right
to use the comments we receive, in whole or in part, and to use the
commenter's name and location, in any medium. See also the [Terms of
Use](http://www.npr.org/about/termsofuse.html), [Privacy
Policy](http://www.npr.org/about/privacypolicy.html) and [Community
FAQ](http://npr.org/communityfaq).

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[![NPR logo](http://media.npr.org/chrome/subnav_toggle.png)](#sidebar)
[![NPR](http://media.npr.org/chrome/news/nprlogo_138x46.gif)](/)

[![NPR
Ed](http://media.npr.org/branding/blogs/ed/branding_main-26dba67f23631d4ed64795d9900894e1ee3639af.png)HOW
LEARNING HAPPENS](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/)

[![NPR
Ed](http://media.npr.org/branding/blogs/ed/branding_main-26dba67f23631d4ed64795d9900894e1ee3639af.png)HOW
LEARNING HAPPENS](http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/)

### [About](#)

We've been to school. We know how education works. Right? In fact, many
aspects of learning — in homes, at schools, at work and elsewhere — are
evolving rapidly, along with our understanding of learning. Join us as
we explore how learning happens.

### [Subscribe](#)

-   [@npr\_ED](https://twitter.com/@npr_ED)
-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/pages/nprEd/402441646563033)

### [Connect With Us](#)

Follow the team [@npr\_ED](http://twitter.com/npr_ED)

Anya Kamenetz [@anya1anya](http://twitter.com/anya1anya)

Cory Turner [@NPRCoryTurner](http://twitter.com/NPRCoryTurner)

Eric Westervelt [@EricNPR](http://twitter.com/EricNPR)

Juana Summers [@jmsummers](http://twitter.com/jmsummers)

Sami Yenigun [@Sami\_Yenigun](http://twitter.com/Sami_Yenigun)

Steve Drummond [@SDrummondNPR](http://twitter.com/SDrummondNPR)

NPR thanks our sponsors

[Become an NPR sponsor](/about/place/corpsupport/)

### [Support NPR](#)

![Support NPR](http://media.npr.org/images/shop_300x150-04.jpg)

#### [NPR Shop](http://shop.npr.org/?utm_source=Banners&utm_medium=ResponsiveAd&utm_content=General&utm_campaign=300x150)

Support The Programs You Love

Search

-   [Home](/)
-   [Topics](/)
-   [Programs](/)
-   [Donate](/stations/donate/index.php)
-   [Stations](/templates/stations/stations/)
-   [NPR Shop](http://shop.npr.org)
-   [Sign In / Register](/templates/reg/login.php)

-   -   [Logout](/templates/reg/logout.php)

****Back

[News](/sections/news/)
=======================

-   [U.S.](/sections/us/)
-   [World](/sections/world/)
-   [Politics](/sections/politics/)
-   [Business](/sections/business/)
-   [Technology](/sections/technology/)
-   [Science](/sections/science/)
-   [Health](/sections/health/)
-   [Race & Culture](/blogs/codeswitch/)

[Arts & Life](/sections/arts/)
==============================

-   [Movies](/sections/movies/)
-   [Pop Culture](/sections/pop-culture/)
-   [Food](/sections/food/)
-   [Art & Design](/sections/art-design/)
-   [Performing Arts](/sections/performing-arts/)
-   [Photography](/sections/photography/)

[Books](/books/)
================

-   [Book Reviews](/sections/book-reviews/)
-   [Author Interviews](/sections/author-interviews/)

[Music](/music/)
================

-   [First Listen](/series/98679384/first-listen/)
-   [Music Articles](/series/100920965/music-articles/)
-   [Studio Sessions](/series/15667984/favorite-sessions/)
-   [Videos](/sections/music-videos/)

[Our Blogs](/about-npr/198341814/npr-blog-directory)
====================================================

[Corrections](/templates/corrections/corrections.php)
=====================================================

[All About NPR](/about/aboutnpr/)
=================================

****Back

-   news & conversations
-   storytelling & humor
-   music
-   also heard on npr stations

****Back

-   [Morning Edition](/programs/morning-edition/)
-   [All Things Considered](/programs/all-things-considered/)
-   [Fresh Air](/programs/fresh-air/)
-   [Here & Now](http://hereandnow.wbur.org/)
-   [The Diane Rehm Show](http://thedianerehmshow.org)
-   [Latino USA](/programs/latino-usa/)
-   [On The Media](http://www.onthemedia.org)
-   [On Point](http://www.onpointradio.org/)
-   [Science Friday](http://www.sciencefriday.com/)
-   [Weekend Edition Saturday](/programs/weekend-edition-saturday/)
-   [Weekend Edition Sunday](/programs/weekend-edition-sunday/)

****Back

-   [Ask Me Another](/programs/ask-me-another/)
-   [Car Talk](http://www.cartalk.com)
-   [Radiolab](http://www.radiolab.org)
-   [Snap Judgment](/programs/snap-judgment/)
-   [StoryCorps](http://storycorps.org)
-   [TED Radio Hour](/programs/ted-radio-hour/)
-   [Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!](/programs/wait-wait-dont-tell-me/)

****Back

-   [All Songs Considered](/programs/all-songs-considered/)
-   [Alt.Latino](/series/alt-latino/)
-   [First Listen](/series/98679384/first-listen/)
-   [Metropolis](/blogs/metropolis/)
-   [Microphone Check](/blogs/microphonecheck/)
-   [Mountain Stage](/series/mountain-stage/)
-   [From The Top](http://www.fromthetop.org/)
-   [JazzSet](/programs/jazzset/)
-   [Piano Jazz](/programs/piano-jazz/)
-   [Song Travels](/series/150560513/song-travels/)
-   [The Thistle &
    Shamrock](/series/103063413/the-thistle-and-shamrock/)
-   [World Cafe](/programs/world-cafe/)

****Back

-   [A Prairie Home Companion
    **(APM)**](http://prairiehome.publicradio.org)
-   [Marketplace **(APM)**](http://marketplace.publicradio.org)
-   [Science Friday](http://www.sciencefriday.com/)
-   [This American Life **(PRX)**](http://www.thisamericanlife.org)
-   [Public Radio Programs A to Z](/programs/)

Support comes from:

-   [](/)
-   [News](/sections/news/)
    -   [U.S.](/sections/us/)
    -   [World](/sections/world/)
    -   [Opinion](/sections/opinion/)
    -   [Politics](/sections/politics)
    -   [Business](/sections/business/)
    -   [Technology](/sections/technology/)
    -   [Science](/sections/science/)
    -   [Health](/sections/health/)
    -   [Sports](/sections/sports/)

-   [Arts & Life](/sections/arts/)
    -   [Books](/books/)
    -   [Movies](/sections/movies/)
    -   [Pop Culture](/sections/pop-culture/)
    -   [Food](/sections/food/)
    -   [Performing Arts](/sections/performing-arts/)
    -   [Games & Humor](/sections/games-humor/)

-   [Music](/music/)
    -   [Music Articles](/series/100920965/music-articles/)
    -   [Music Videos](/sections/music-videos/)
    -   [NPR Music Radio](/templates/websites/musicstreams.php)
    -   [Browse Artists
        A-Z](/templates/artist/artist_index.php?filter=A)
    -   [All Songs Considered](/programs/all-songs-considered/)
    -   [Alt.Latino](/series/alt-latino/)
    -   [First Listen](/series/98679384/first-listen/)
    -   [Metropolis](/blogs/metropolis/)
    -   [Microphone Check](/blogs/microphonecheck/)
    -   [Mountain Stage](/series/mountain-stage/)
    -   [From The Top](http://www.fromthetop.org/)
    -   [JazzSet](/programs/jazzset/)
    -   [Piano Jazz](/programs/piano-jazz/)
    -   [Song Travels](/series/150560513/song-travels/)
    -   [The Thistle &
        Shamrock](/series/103063413/the-thistle-and-shamrock/)
    -   [World Cafe](/programs/world-cafe/)

-   [Programs](/programs/)
    -   [All Things Considered](/programs/all-things-considered/)
    -   [Ask Me Another](/programs/ask-me-another/)
    -   [Car Talk](http://www.cartalk.com)
    -   [The Diane Rehm Show](http://thedianerehmshow.org)
    -   [Fresh Air](/programs/fresh-air/)
    -   [Here & Now](http://hereandnow.wbur.org/)
    -   [Latino USA](/programs/latino-usa/)
    -   [Morning Edition](/programs/morning-edition/)
    -   [On The Media](http://www.onthemedia.org)
    -   [On Point](http://www.onpointradio.org/)
    -   [Science Friday](http://www.sciencefriday.com/)
    -   [TED Radio Hour](/programs/ted-radio-hour/)
    -   [Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!](/programs/wait-wait-dont-tell-me/)
    -   [Weekend Edition Saturday](/programs/weekend-edition-saturday/)
    -   [Weekend Edition Sunday](/programs/weekend-edition-sunday/)

-   [Listen](/listen/)
    -   [Hourly
        News](javascript:NPR.Player.openPlayer(0,0,null,NPR.Player.Action.PLAY_NOW,%20NPR.Player.Type.NEWSCAST,%20NPR.Player.Mode.FROM_FILE);)
    -   [NPR Program
        Stream](javascript:NPR.Player.openPlayer(0,0,null,NPR.Player.Action.LIVE_STREAM,%20NPR.Player.Type.PROGRAM_STREAM,%20NPR.Player.Mode.FROM_FILE);)
    -   [Find Station Streams](/stations/)
    -   [Podcasts](/rss/podcast/podcast_directory.php)
    -   [More Ways To
        Listen](/about-npr/187046089/ways-to-listen-to-npr)

-   [About](/about/)
    -   [Contact
        Us](http://help.npr.org/npr/includes/customer/npr/custforms/contactus.aspx)
    -   [NPR Shop](http://shop.npr.org)
    -   [Visit NPR](http://tours.npr.org/npr/Home/)
    -   [Careers at
        NPR](http://www.npr.org/about-npr/181953728/work-at-npr)
    -   [Press Room](/about/press/)
    -   ['This Is NPR' Blog](/blogs/thisisnpr/)
    -   [Support and Sponsor](/about/support/)
    -   [Corrections](/templates/corrections/corrections.php)
    -   [NPR Ombudsman](/blogs/ombudsman/)
    -   [Permissions](/about-npr/179881519/rights-and-permissions-information)
    -   [Email Newsletters](/email/)
    -   [RSS Feeds](/rss/)
    -   [The NPR API](/api/)

© 2014 NPR

-   [Help](http://help.npr.org)
-   [Contact](http://help.npr.org/npr/includes/customer/npr/custforms/contactus.aspx)
-   [Terms of Use](/about-npr/179876898/terms-of-use)
-   [Privacy](/about-npr/179878450/privacy-policy)
-   [Sponsorship
    Choices](/about-npr/179878450/privacy-policy#opting-out-of-cookies-and-web-beacons)
-   [Text-Only](http://thin.npr.org/)

© 2014 NPR

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2014/06/01/317433695/in-kentucky-students-succeed-without-tests
