[joey](../../../)/ [blog](../../)/ [entry](../)/ databranches: using git
as a database

-   [Edit](/ikiwiki.cgi?page=blog%2Fentry%2Fdatabranches&do=edit)
-   [RecentChanges](../../../recentchanges/)
-   [History](http://source.joeyh.branchable.com/?p=source.git;a=history;f=blog/entry/databranches.mdwn;hb=HEAD)
-   [Preferences](/ikiwiki.cgi?do=prefs)
-   [Branchable](/ikiwiki.cgi?do=branchable)
-   [5 comments](./#comments)

I've just released [git-annex](../../../code/git-annex/) version 3,
which stops cluttering the filesystem with `.git-annex` directories.
Instead it stores its data in a git-annex branch, which it manages
entirely transparently to the user. It is essentially now using git as a
distributed NOSQL database. Let's call it a databranch.

This is not an unheard of thing to do with git. The `git notes` built
into recent git does something similar, using a dynamically balanced
tree in a hidden branch to store notes. My own
[pristine-tar](../../../code/pristine-tar/) injects data into a git
branch. (Thanks to Alexander Wirt for showing me how to do that when I
was a git newbie.) Some [distributed bug
trackers](http://dist-bugs.branchable.com/software/) store their data in
git in various ways.

What I think takes git-annex beyond these is that it not only injects
data into git, but it does it in a way that's efficient for large
quantities of changing data, and it automates merging remote changes
into its databranch. This is novel enough to write up how I did it,
especially the latter which tends to be a weak spot in things that use
git this way.

Indeed, it's important to approach your design for using git as a
database from the perspective of automated merging. Get the merging
right and the rest will follow. I've chosen to use the simplest possible
merge, the union merge: When merging parent trees A and B, the result
will have all files that are in either A or B, and files present in both
will have their lines merged (and possibly reordered or uniqed).

The main thing git-annex stores in its databranch is a bunch of
[presence
logs](http://source.git-annex.branchable.com/?p=source.git;a=blob;f=PresenceLog.hs;hb=HEAD).
Each log file corresponds to one item, and has lines with this form:

    timestamp [0|1] id

This records whether the item was present at the specified id at a given
time. It can be easily union merged, since only the newest timestamp for
an id is relevant. Older lines can be compacted away whenever the log is
updated. Generalizing this technique for other kinds of data is probably
an interesting problem. :)

While git can union merge changes into the currently checked out branch,
when using git as a database, you want to merge into your internal-use
databranch instead, and maintaining a checkout of that branch is
inefficient. So [git-annex](../../../code/git-annex/) includes a general
purpose [git-union-merge
command](http://git-annex.branchable.com/git-union-merge/) that can
union merge changes into a git branch, efficiently, without needing the
branch to be checked out. Another problem is how to trigger the merge
when git pulls changes from remotes. There is no suitible git hook
(post-merge won't do because the checked out branch may not change at
all). git-annex works around this problem by automatically merging
`*/git-annex` into `git-annex` each time it is run. I hope that git
might eventually get such capabilities built into it to better support
this type of thing.

So that's the data. Now, how to efficiently inject it into your
databranch? And how to efficiently retrieve it?

The second question is easier to answer, although it took me a while to
find the right way ... Which is two orders of magnitude faster than the
wrong way, and fairly close in speed to reading data files directly from
the filesystem. The right choice is to use `git-cat-file --batch`;
starting it up the first time data is requested, and leaving it running
for further queries. ~~This would be straightforward, except
`git-cat-file --batch` is a little difficult when a file is requested
that does not exist. To detect that, you'll have to examine its stderr
for error messages too. Perhaps `git-cat-file --batch` could be improved
to print something machine parseable to stdout when it cannot find a
file.~~ Takes some careful parsing, but straightforward.

Efficiently injecting changes into the databranch was another place
where my first attempt was an order of magnitude slower than my final
code. The key trick is to maintain a separate index file for the branch.
(Set `GIT_INDEX_FILE` to make git use it.) Then changes can be fed into
git by using `git hash-object`, and those hashes recorded into the
branch's index file with `git update-index --index-info`. Finally, just
commit the separate index file and update the branch's ref.

That works ok, but the sad truth is that git's index files don't scale
well as the number of files in the tree grows. Once you have a hundred
thousand or so files, updating an index file becomes slow, since for
every update, git has to rewrite the entire file. I hope that git will
be improved to scale better, perhaps by some git wizard who understands
index files (does anyone except Junio and Linus?) arranging for them to
be modified in-place.

In the meantime, I use a workaround: Each change that will be committed
to the databranch is first recorded into a journal file, and when
git-annex shuts down, it runs `git hash-object` just once, passing it
all the journal files, and feeds the resulting hashes into a single call
to `git update-index`. Of course, my database code has to make sure to
check the journal when retrieving data. And of course, it has to deal
with possibly being interrupted in the middle of updating the journal,
or before it can commit it, and so forth. If gory details interest you,
the complete code for using a git branch as a database, with journaling,
is
[here](http://source.git-annex.branchable.com/?p=source.git;a=blob;f=Branch.hs;hb=HEAD).

After all that, git-annex turned out to be nearly as fast as before when
it was simply reading files from the filesystem, and actually faster in
some cases. And without the clutter of the `.git-annex/` directory, git
use is overall faster, commits are uncluttered, and there's no
difficulty with branching. Using a git branch as a database is not
always the right choice, and git's plumbing could be improved to better
support it, but it is an interesting technique.

[RSS](comments.rss "joey (RSS feed)")

[cat-file
--batch](http://joeyh.name/blog/entry/databranches/#comment-fc89858fb119f2cad69c293b0642df58)

    $ git cat-file --batch 2>/dev/null | sed -e 's/^/response> /'
    HEAD:foo.c
    response> HEAD:foo.c missing
    ^D

Comment by
[Jonathan](https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawl91s0996BktsJGgXftm57KB_gPz619xN4)
— Saturday evening, July 2nd, 2011

-   [Remove
    comment](/ikiwiki.cgi?page=blog%2Fentry%2Fdatabranches%2Fcomment_1_660493e61e0ff5b607e18979797cf720&do=remove)

[using git as a database on
torrent](http://joeyh.name/blog/entry/databranches/#comment-1621f020264c522fdd37f2edf50d9513)

Save the database on the **torrent** worldwide network, it allows for:

1.  easy worldwide publishing, access, distribution,
2.  immorability (no loss possible 4 eternity, even safe 4 evil
    politicians' needs),
3.  ..?,
4.  Third Millenium Proof.

This duo: git-torrent is hitting the streets soon.

It is safe, even where/when internet is forbidden by law.

Comment by [John
Smith](https://me.yahoo.com/a/i1GwthA8yIqNouWhpkHaYlM3Bvr7yNhfLg--#729b5)
— late Saturday night, July 3rd, 2011

-   [Remove
    comment](/ikiwiki.cgi?page=blog%2Fentry%2Fdatabranches%2Fcomment_2_535a18e0c08ab01380308cbf311158ed&do=remove)

[Do you need to use a git
index?](http://joeyh.name/blog/entry/databranches/#comment-f6eb06e50a5714f8c00ad365978e278a)
Not sure if this applies to your database scenario but you can avoid
using an index altogether and work with the bare repository directly
using git-mktree, git-hash-object and git-update-ref. These are
sufficient and do not require a working tree although you'll need to
create commits/trees manually but it may give you the control you are
looking for. Comment by
[Mark](https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawmPRrh4nfL6gHSqgzj8ZIrzwkhk1b2eFyk)
— mid-morning Sunday, July 3rd, 2011

-   [Remove
    comment](/ikiwiki.cgi?page=blog%2Fentry%2Fdatabranches%2Fcomment_3_2d20fdff251d893d16500ae14384942f&do=remove)

[comment
4](http://joeyh.name/blog/entry/databranches/#comment-de0793f264646617ce0fb71fb6bccce7)

@Jonathan thanks for correction

@Mark I should take another look at git-mktree .. as long as the files
in the database are hashed into small trees, it should be fairly
efficient to use -- but due to the hashing it'd need to be run to
generate the subdirectory trees and up to the parent, so fairly complex.

Comment by [joey](http://joey.kitenet.net/) — late Sunday morning, July
3rd, 2011

-   [Remove
    comment](/ikiwiki.cgi?page=blog%2Fentry%2Fdatabranches%2Fcomment_4_4a4d95d896392fce8f422696e8a61212&do=remove)

[Using also a branch for configuration of
ikiwiki?](http://joeyh.name/blog/entry/databranches/#comment-be7e8024de992feb34d8a189acf32f48)

Hi, Joey.

I think that it is painful to keep ikiwiki configuration files outside
of its repository, as with the plain repository I can't quite exactly
reproduce a site compiled with ikiwiki. In other words, I would love to
see a repository self hosted.

What about using a branch (say, `configuration` or `config`) to store
the configuration on the sources of a ikiwiki site? If ikiwiki knew
this, if it were not passed a explicit configuration file, then it could
try to look for a configuration branch and the setup of the site there
(if the user so desired).

What about this idea? This would make it easier to make self-hosted
ikiwiki repositories, wouldn't it?

Thanks.

Comment by [rbrito](https://launchpad.net/~rbrito) — Saturday afternoon,
July 9th, 2011

-   [Remove
    comment](/ikiwiki.cgi?page=blog%2Fentry%2Fdatabranches%2Fcomment_5_9b813067a06926330d266baacfbc70c3&do=remove)

[Add a
comment](/ikiwiki.cgi?page=blog%2Fentry%2Fdatabranches&do=comment)

Tags: [git](../../git/) Links: [subverting hierarchy with
git](../subverting_hierarchy_with_git/)

Last edited Saturday evening, July 2nd, 2011

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://joeyh.name/blog/entry/databranches/
