[](http://qz.com "Quartz")
==========================

Global

**

[Obsessions](#) [**](#) [**](#) [**](#) [Log In](#) [Log Out](#)
[Register](#) [Settings](#) Follow Us [Facebook](#) [Twitter](#) [Daily
Brief Signup](#) [About Quartz](/about)

Because he's worth it

The economic case for paternity leave
=====================================

##### Written by

[Gwynn
Guilford](/author/gguilfordqz/)[@sinoceros](http://twitter.com/sinoceros)

September 24, 2014

**Just as important as the day job.Reuters/Phil Noble

##### SHARE

-   [](https://twitter.com/share?text=The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave&url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841&via=qz "Tweet")
-   [](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841 "Share on Facebook")
-   [](http://linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841&title=The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave&summary=Suddenly%20last%20year%2C%C2%A0maternity%20leave%C2%A0got%20a%20makeover%2C%C2%A0courtesy%20of%20a%C2%A0most%C2%A0improbable%20source%3A%20Shinzo%20Abe.%20Japan%26%238217%3Bs%20prime%20minister%C2%A0is%C2%A0synonymous%20with%C2%A0machismo-spiked%20nationalism%20(he%20famously%20denied%20that%20women%C2%A0forced%20into%20sexual%20servitude%20by%20Japanese%20soldiers%20in%20World%20War%20II%20were%C2%A0%26%238220%3Bcoerced%26%238221%3B).%20But%20when%20he%C2%A0unveiled%20his%C2%A0sweeping%20economic%20revival%20plan%2C%20it%20included%C2%A0longer%20leave%20for%20mothers.%20And%20this%20wasn%26%238217%3Bt%20the%20usual%20pastel-hued%20sop%20to%20women%20voters%3B%C2%A0the%20way%20%5B%26hellip%3B%5D "Share on LinkedIn")
-   [](mailto:?subject=Quartz:%20The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave&body=http://qz.com/266841%0A%0ASuddenly%20last%20year%2C%C2%A0maternity%20leave%C2%A0got%20a%20makeover%2C%C2%A0courtesy%20of%20a%C2%A0most%C2%A0improbable%20source%3A%20Shinzo%20Abe.%20Japan%E2%80%99s%20prime%20minister%C2%A0is%C2%A0synonymous%20with%C2%A0machismo-spiked%20nationalism%20%28he%20famously%20denied%20that%20women%C2%A0forced%20into%20sexual%20servitude%20by%20Japanese%20soldiers%20in%20World%20War%20II%20were%C2%A0%E2%80%9Ccoerced%E2%80%9D%29.%20But%20when%20he%C2%A0unveiled%20his%C2%A0sweeping%20economic%20revival%20plan%2C%20it%20included%C2%A0longer%20leave%20for%20mothers.%20And%20this%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20the%20usual%20pastel-hued%20sop%20to%20women%20voters%3B%C2%A0the%20way%20%5B%E2%80%A6%5D%0A%0A "Email")
-   [](whatsapp://send?text=The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave:http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841 "WhatsApp")

##### Written by

[Gwynn
Guilford](/author/gguilfordqz/)[@sinoceros](http://twitter.com/sinoceros)

September 24, 2014

Suddenly last year, maternity leave got a makeover, courtesy of a most
improbable source: Shinzo Abe.

Japan’s prime minister is synonymous with [machismo-spiked
nationalism](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/03/opinion/mr-abes-dangerous-revisionism.html?_r=1)
(he [famously
denied](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/1544471/Japanese-PM-denies-wartime-comfort-women-were-forced.html)
that women forced into sexual servitude by Japanese soldiers in World
War II were “coerced”). But when he unveiled his sweeping economic
revival plan, it included longer leave for mothers. And this wasn’t the
usual pastel-hued sop to women voters; the way Abe framed it, longer
maternity leave was a shot in the arm of Japan’s moribund economy.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261071%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261071%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/japan-s-gdp-growth-japan-s-gdp-growth_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Though uncharacteristic, his reasoning made a certain sense.

Nearly two decades ago, Japan started running out of workers, dragging
on economic growth. Making things worse is the fact that [seven-tenths
of Japanese women](http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-21880124) drop out
of the workforce after having their first child. Getting them back to
work could boost Japan’s GDP [by as much as
15%](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702303759604579091680931293404)
(paywall), says Abe. And the way to do that was to make maternity leave
longer.

The secret to keeping mothers in the workforce lies not in giving them
more time off, but in getting more fathers to stay at home instead.

Japan is hardly the only country that would benefit from keeping more
mothers in the labor force. If American women worked at the same rates
men did, [US GDP could grow
9%](http://www.state.gov/e/oce/rls/2013/211088.htm), say economists;
France’s would pop by more than 11%; and Italy’s would see a whopping
23% boost, according to OECD calculations. The average across the OECD
[would total
12%](http://www.oecd.org/about/secretary-general/genderdynamicshowcancountriesclosetheeconomicgendergap.htm).

There’s only one problem with Abe’s plan: It’s targeting the wrong
people. More maternity leave might sound like a great idea, but as long
as mothers are the only parents taking leave, longer stints at home
actually *worsens*job discrimination against them and makes them less
likely to pursue a career.

Rather, as the experiences of Sweden, Iceland, and a handful of other
countries show, the secret to keeping mothers in the workforce lies not
in giving them more time off, but in getting more fathers to stay at
home instead. And that, it turns out, depends to a large extent on
getting rid of the pay gap that exists between men and women almost
everywhere.

Why “womenomics” works
----------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270208%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270208%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![Specialist trader Amanda Anderson works at her post on the floor of
the New York Stock Exchange December 9, 2013. REUTERS/Brendan
McDermid](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/stock-trader-woman-female-labor-participation.jpg?w=640 "When women vie for “men’s” jobs, competition boosts productivity.")When
women vie for “men’s” jobs, competition boosts
productivity.Reuters/Brendan McDermid

There are lots of good arguments for adding more women to the workforce.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261069%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261069%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/female-labor-participation-rates-us-uk-sweden-japan-italy-germany_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

An economy grows when it adds more people to make things, or when the
workers it has make things faster. Since upping productivity—as the
latter option is called—is notoriously tricky, when an economy is
stagnating it’s generally a good idea to scare up some new workers.
Importing immigrants is one choice (that’s what the US favors). The
other is simply getting more of your working-age population into jobs.
And in most developed countries, the biggest base of unemployed workers
is women.

The benefits of upping the share of women working come in fits and
starts. At first, it tends to lower productivity, partly because some of
this additional female labor is usually part-time, and partly because
new people need training.

Over time, however, influxes of women make a workforce not just bigger
but also more productive. Firms in the top quartile for female senior
managers earn 56% more than companies with none, according to McKinsey &
Company. This may be because management teams with an equal gender
balance tend to innovate more, make more informed decisions, and take
fewer big risks. The share prices of companies with one or more women on
the board outperform those with none, [Credit Suisse research
shows](https://www.credit-suisse.com/newsletter/doc/gender_diversity.pdf)
(pdf, p.12). Although that’s not a causal relationship, Credit Suisse
cites research suggesting that greater gender diversity in leadership
improves communication and reduces corrosive competition among senior
managers.\
 Women are “the ultimate agents of aggregate demand.”

There are other benefits to the economy too. Accounting for
[seven-tenths of global consumer
spending](http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2014/091214.htm),
women are “the ultimate agents of aggregate demand,” says Christine
Lagarde, head of the International Monetary Fund. Companies that design
and market their goods and services in ways that appeal to women will
sell more effectively than those that don’t. Companies led by talented
women are more likely to pull that off.

Women also tend to spend more on healthcare and education. These
services are more labor-intensive than most sectors, so they generate
more jobs. And when these “agents of aggregate demand” earn more,
they’ll spend more too.

Finally, women tend to invest a larger chunk of their income than men on
their children’s well-being—or as economists call it, “human capital.”
In the long term, this trend should help create a smarter, heartier
talent pool.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270185%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270185%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/share-of-the-population-aged-65-2010-2050_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Of course, getting more women to work isn’t the only way to keep a
country’s economy humming; you can also buy workers from other
countries. The US prefers this approach, relying heavily on a temporary
worker program to supplement its workforce. Immigrants are usually young
and healthy, and therefore tend to contribute more taxes than they take
in services from the state (even many illegal workers pay taxes). But
the lack of employment protections or financial security means that they
neither produce nor consume as much as they might. And the risk of a
[labor
shortage](http://qz.com/253047/the-philippines-booming-economy-is-causing-a-maid-drain-in-hong-kong-and-singapore/)
always looms.

There’s one final reason to employ more women. Every major developed
country is in the [midst of an aging
crisis](http://qz.com/173379/immigration-is-saving-the-us-from-an-aging-crisis/).
Women are having babies too slowly to replace the people bowing out of
their workforces, causing an ever higher number of retirees to be
supported by the taxes of an ever-shrinking number of workers.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266867%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266867%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/average-number-of-children-born-per-woman-japan-iceland-us-sweden-oecd-eu-21_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Paradoxically, upping female employment levels appears to stave off this
peril. Women in countries with higher female employment rates give birth
to more children, on average, [according to Goldman
Sachs](http://www.goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/investing-in-women/research-articles/womens-work.pdf)
(pdf, p.9).

**The problem with maternity leave**
------------------------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270217%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270217%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![A worker is seen inside a shop damaged during recent clashes in
central Beirut May 18, 2008. Rival Lebanese leaders made progress
towards ending their political crisis on Sunday but disagreements over
Hezbollah's weapons remained a major hurdle to a Qatari-mediated deal.
REUTERS/Damir
Sagolj](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/women-glass-ceiling-lebanon.jpg?w=640 "What keeps women from breaking the “glass ceiling”?")What
keeps women from breaking the “glass ceiling”?Reuters/Damir Sagolj

So the case for getting more women working is clear. How to make it
happen?

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266865%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266865%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/us-female-labor-participation-rate-us-female-labor-participation-rate_chartbuilder-1.png?w=640)

The standard answer is maternity leave. All over the globe, paid
maternity leave policies have proven vital in boosting the likelihood
that a new mother will return to work, and will put in more hours after
she returns. Along with tax reform, these policies powered the surge in
Europe’s female labor-force participation in the 1980s and ’90s. The US,
however, stagnated. Whereas in 1990 the US had the sixth-highest rate of
female labor participation in the OECD in 1990, within two decades it
had plunged to 17th place. The US’s lack of paid parental leave and
flexible work policies were responsible for nearly three-tenths of that
drop, according to an [oft-cited study](http://ftp.iza.org/dp7140.pdf)
(pdf) by Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn of Cornell University.

But on its own, paid maternity leave works only up to a point. Even in
euro-zone countries and others that have boosted the share of women in
the workforce by offering lavish maternity leave and cheap childcare,
the gap between male and female labor participation still yawns.

For the vast majority of women who don’t return to work after giving
birth, this is because the costs of returning—both financial and
psychological—outweigh the benefits.

On its own, paid maternity leave works only up to a point.

Here are the factors they’re likely weighing. Since it’s assumed the
mother will take a long maternal leave after giving birth, businesses
systematically underpay women and skip them for promotions in favor of
their male colleagues. Their husbands, therefore, likely have a much
higher salary and aren’t eligible to take much more than a few weeks, at
most, of paid childcare leave.

So women have little choice but to take many months off work to care for
their newborn. Even in countries with robust maternal employment
protections, low-skilled women in particular still face pressure to quit
their jobs. Many who consider returning to work once their child is old
enough for daycare struggle to find a job that pays well enough to cover
childcare—or, with their skills now outdated, to find a job at all.
Highly educated women, meanwhile, often find that taking a lengthy leave
jolts them off the management track. And since this group tends to have
wealthier husbands, without the professional motivation, there’s no
point in returning.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266866%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266866%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/maternal-employment-rates-by-age-of-youngest-child-2011-3-years-3-5-years_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Treating women’s work as less valuable than men’s is sexist. But so is
paying mothers more money than fathers, and for much longer, to raise
children. In fact, the two reinforce each other—something Japan’s dim
history of female career advancement illustrates all too well.

Japan’s incredible shrinking workforce
--------------------------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F240884%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F240884%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![father japan paternity leave parenting parental leave abe shinzo Sota
Miki, 6, sitting on his father Yoshihiko's shoulders watch players after
a baseball exhibition game between Oakland Athletics and Yomiuri Giants
in Tokyo March 25, 2012. REUTERS/Toru
Hanai](http://img.qz.com/2014/07/father-dad-childcare-paternity-leave-japan.jpg?w=640 "Japan’s lack of paternity leave makes moments like this rare.")Japan’s
lack of paternity leave makes moments like this rare.Reuters/Toru Hanai

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261073%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261073%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/japan-s-working-age-population-working-age-population_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Japan has the biggest aging crisis of any country in the world. This
isn’t a new problem; its working-age population peaked in 1995 at just
shy of 87 million. But though Japan reformed its maternity leave
policies repeatedly throughout the 2000s, some 7 million women remain
out of the workforce for good. And instead of encouraging more babies,
the policy has led birth rates to fall; Japan is one of the few
countries in the world where pet [dogs and cats outnumber
children](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CDMQFjAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.goldmansachs.com%2Four-thinking%2Foutlook%2Fwomenomics4-folder%2Fwomenomics4-time-to-walk-the-talk.pdf&ei=jvshVLqbLcrvoAS3iYKoDA&usg=AFQjCNGKNMtVFF8vGqfUhyRf7RT02jO5RQ&sig2=HoxEhB1UM5Dg5dCxkh_4SQ&bvm=bv.75775273,bs.1,d.cGU)
(pdf, p.4).

The funny thing is, women in Japan don’t start out working any less than
in most other rich countries. The chart below tracks female labor-force
participation, a measure that includes both those with jobs and those
looking for work. Roughly the same percentage of Japanese women enter
the workforce in their 20s as Sweden and the UK. But once they hit their
30s, things change—forming a trough in the composition of the labor
force that demographers call the “m-curve”:

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261072%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261072%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/japan-s-m-shaped-curve-canada-germany-japan-sweden-united-kingdom-united-states_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

It’s not that they lack the skills to return. The women of Japan are
better-educated than those of nearly any other country on the planet—in
fact, [more Japanese women enter
university](http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/23/japans-women-to-the-rescue/)
now than men.

But upon graduation, most of that learning gets tossed aside. Women are
hired into what economist Noah Smith [calls an “economic
underclass](http://noahpinionblog.blogspot.com/2013/04/will-abe-address-japans-number-one.html),”
with the majority in jobs with “low, stagnant salaries, few benefits,
few guarantees and little if any possibility of promotion.” And as
companies slot women into dead-end clerical jobs, they start grooming
their male peers for promotion along the management track.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F267265%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F267265%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/labor-participation-rates-among-women-aged-25-54-college-educated-women_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Though this two-track system smacks of sexism, from a human-resources
perspective, it makes a crude kind of sense. That’s because government
policy and Japanese culture make it hard for fathers to take leave, and
unusually easy for mothers.

In 2012, only 1.9% of Japanese men who were eligible for childcare leave
took it, down from 2.6% the previous year.

Japanese couples are currently allowed [up to 12
months](http://www.leavenetwork.org/fileadmin/Leavenetwork/Country_notes/2014/Japan.pdf)
(pdf) of “childcare leave” to divide between them more or less as they
see fit (and 14 months if the father takes at least two of them). The
government pays the first six months at two-thirds of the parent’s
salary, and the remaining months at 50%.

That might all seem very equitable. But in practice, maternal recovery
and breastfeeding mean the mother is likely to take the earlier
months—paid at two-thirds her wages. If the father takes the later
months, he’ll get just half his wages. Since he on average makes 27%
more than his wife, the more leave he takes, the more income the family
loses. And this has the predictable result: As of 2012, the last year
for which there are data, [only 1.9% of
men](http://www.scmp.com/news/asia/article/1495347/japan-encourages-fathers-take-more-active-role-child-care)
(paywall) who were eligible for childcare leave actually took it, [down
from
2.6%](http://www.leavenetwork.org/fileadmin/Leavenetwork/Country_notes/2013/Japan.FINALcitation.pdf)
(pdf, p.5) the previous year.

With that kind of policy, it’s no wonder companies don’t invest in
women’s careers. Even if a female employee returns to work after having
a baby, cultural norms mean that she’s going to raise the kid—and that
makes her less likely to be able to put in long hours at work.

A policy supposedly meant to help women ends up penalizing them…
----------------------------------------------------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270218%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270218%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![Two women join their children during a demonstration to demand longer
maternity leave in San Jose January 18, 2013. Women's rights groups
marched to demand the approval of an extension of maternity leave from 4
to 7 months, said event organiser Cristivel Leandro. REUTERS/Juan Carlos
Ulate](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/maternity-leave.jpg?w=640 "Women’s work?")Women’s
work?Reuters/Juan Carlos Ulate

The trend is self-reinforcing. Once passed over for a management-track
position, a woman has less motivation to work hard to advance her
career. Since she won’t have been exposed to the same range or depth of
experience as her male colleagues, she’ll be less competitive next time
she tries to find work. Even if she’s a candidate for a career-advancing
job, her manager—who is most likely to be a man—doesn’t have an
incentive to give her a flexible work schedule to fit around parenting,
as he’ll have plenty of other male employees willing to put in the long
hours.

Women in Japan****are already paid only 73% of what men make for the
equivalent jobs; the fact that this gap grows during childbearing years
suggests what some call a “[motherhood pay
penalty](http://www.brownpoliticalreview.org/2014/04/employing-japans-baby-making-machines/).”
The work women can find after having a child is often part-time, and
usually less well paid, so they have less incentive to go back to work.
It’s telling that the better educated a woman is, the more likely she is
to stay out of the workforce.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261076%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261076%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/what-causes-female-college-grads-to-drop-out-of-the-workforce-in-japan-the-us_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Oddly enough, men don’t have it so great either. In return for job
security, companies expect their male employees to work grueling hours
that end in booze-drenched after-hours bonding sessions, week after week
for their entire career. Until very recently, to test their commitment
companies would deliberately transfer male workers away from their
families. This peer pressure is also part of why Japanese men [seldom
take vacation
days](http://www.scmp.com/news/asia/article/1495347/japan-encourages-fathers-take-more-active-role-child-care).

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261075%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261075%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/where-the-oecd-s-most-overworked-men-live_mapbuilder.png?w=1024)

This isn’t especially good for the economy. Chronic overwork doesn’t
mean more work actually gets done; in fact it’s thought to be one of the
factors driving down Japan’s productivity. (Another factor is likely
part-time workers, who [tend to be less
productive](http://dish.andrewsullivan.com/2014/08/26/cutting-hours-cuts-profits/).)
But because it functions like a form of professional hazing—no one wants
to risk looking lazy or uncommitted—it persists.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261079%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F261079%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/gains-in-productivity-germany-japan-sweden-uk-us_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Men understandably get resentful about these extra hours, which is part
of why the few men who do elect to take parental leave fear reprisals
from both management and peers. “If a male worker announces that he is
going to take paternity leave, people around him start to doubt his
suitability for the job,” said Tetsuya Ando, who founded an support
group for fathers called [Fathering
Japan](http://www.fathering.jp/english/ando-papa-profile.html) in 2005.

That stigma can be overt, says Matthew Apple, a college professor who
has lived and worked in Japan since 1999, and runs a [blog called Taking
Leave](http://takingleaveinjapan.wordpress.com/) about his experiences
raising a family there. Apple opted to take parental leave after he and
his Japanese wife had a daughter. When he returned to work, some of his
more conservative colleagues stopped talking to him and successfully
lobbied for his workload to increase to make up for his absence. For
women, though it is worse; one of his female colleagues was pressured to
quit after taking maternity leave (she ultimately triumphed in keeping
her job, though she made a lot of enemies in the process, says Apple).

…and the policy encouraging paternity leave is too weak
-------------------------------------------------------

That culture is gradually starting to change, says Apple, particularly
among younger men. To the government’s credit, in 2011 it launched the
[Ikumen Project](http://ikumen-project.jp/declaration/celebrity.php)
(the word is a slangy play on *ikemen*, which means a “good-looking
man,” and *iku* (育), which means “to raise”), an online community that
2011 encourages fathers to take a more active role in child-rearing.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266885%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266885%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/ikumen.png?w=640 "The Japanese government’s campaign for stay-home dads.")The
Japanese government’s campaign for stay-home dads.Screenshot of
ikumen-project.jp

Another cultural milestone occurred in Aug. 2014, when Masako Mori, the
minister then in charge of the [declining birthrate and gender
equality](http://japan.kantei.go.jp/96_abe/cabinetlist1/daijin/index_e.html),
declared that she would [promote men who take “paternity
leave](http://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/asiapacific/japan-s-abe-seeks-to-get/1295730.html),”
by which she probably meant parental leave. Abe now says he wants the
number of men taking leave to rise from 1.9% to 13% by 2020.

However, it’s not clear that this is much more than rhetoric. The salary
gap between men and women means it still usually makes more economic
sense for fathers to keep working, especially given that they’re likely
to get only half their wages during parental leave.

So what the Japanese government ought to do is fix this disparity in how
men’s and women’s time is valued. Instead, it’s considering making it
worse, by extending maternity leave to three years. That would further
entrench the traditional divide between men’s and women’s work,
worsening Japan’s labor-supply problems and keeping GDP growth anemic at
best.

Indeed, this makes it look as if Shinzo Abe’s agenda is less about
jump-starting the economy than about trying to boost birth rates—despite
the ample evidence that longer maternity leave will bring them down
instead.

**Japan’s dads aren’t the only ones stuck at the office**
---------------------------------------------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270207%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270207%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![japan workforce declining birth rate birthrate productivity A stock
dealer yawns during trading at the Tokyo Stock Exchange in Tokyo March
2, 2009. Japan's Nikkei stock average slid 3.2 percent on Monday, with
Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group and other banks sinking on fears about
their U.S. peers, while exporters slipped on worry about the U.S.
economy. REUTERS/Issei
Kato](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/japan-workforce-men-overtime-overwork-productivity-men-women-female-labor-force.jpg?w=640 "Not getting that much done.")Not
getting that much done.Reuters/Issei Kato

Governments can hardly expect businesses to value women’s time equally
with men’s when their leave policies don’t pay fathers equally for
providing childcare. Only when governments and companies value women’s
and men’s work the same—in both the workplace and the nursery—will this
handicap against women lift.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F267280%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F267280%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/ilo_paternity-leave-map_colorcorrected.jpeg?w=640)

Japan is hardly alone in failing to grasp this, however. More than 100
countries now provide government-funded cash benefits for maternity
leave; only 70 offer paid paternity leave. Even among OECD countries,
only two-thirds offer paid leave for fathers, and even those often for
no more than a few weeks. Only three countries—Chile, Portugal, and
Italy—make paternity leave compulsory, though only for a few days.

For those that do offer longer leave, compensation often determines
take-up. The lower the percentage of salary the government offers a
stay-at-home parent, the bigger the penalty to the family if it’s the
higher earner—usually, the father—who stays at home.

Another common worry about “family-friendly” European policies is that
they encourage women to settle for part-time work and for mommy-track
career paths. The study by Blau and Kahn found that American women were
more likely than those of the rest of the OECD to work full-time and to
occupy managerial positions. Two major reasons, they note, are that
“family-friendly” policies make it easier for less career-oriented women
to stay in the workforce and for more ambitious women to shift into
part-time work without sacrificing too much. In the US, by comparison,
those two types of women are either dropping out, or forsaking babies
for the corner office.

**How Sweden finally revolutionized parenting**
-----------------------------------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F267037%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F267037%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![paternity leave father parental leave In this Wednesday, June 29, 2011
photo, Henrik Holgersson, right, watches his son, Arvid, center with
hat, play with Walter Johansson accompanied by his father Henrik
Johansson at a playground in Stockholm. Holgersson has split Sweden's
generous parental leave with his girlfriend Jenny Karlsson and is
spending eight months at home with their child. Holgersson, who normally
works as a rigger at an event company, says his time with his son as a
stay-at-home dad is one of the best in his life. (AP Photo/Niklas
Larsson](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/daddy-leave-sweden-father-paternity-leave1.jpg?w=640 "Two Swedish dads on duty at a Stockholm playground.")Two
Swedish dads on duty at a Stockholm playground.AP Photo/Niklas Larsson

Though the Sweden of stereotype might be a machismo-free festival of
gender neutrality, in the mid-1970s it wasn’t markedly different from
today’s Japan. Hardly any dads took time off after the birth of a child.

That didn’t change even after Sweden scrapped maternity leave in 1974
and—like Japan today—replaced it with an overall allotment of paid
parental leave that could be shared however the mother and father chose.
Fathers who took time off were derisively nicknamed *velourman* or
*velourpappa* (“[velour men” or “velour
dads](http://hypebeast.com/2013/12/velour-2013-fallwinter-editorial-by-sven-eselgroth)“)—a
reference to the fabric popular in unisex clothes at the time—and
disdained for being unmanly. In the mid-1970s, only [562 dads claimed
parental
leave](http://monocle.com/monocolumn/2010/monocle-in-association-with-left-holding-the-baby/)—about
0.5%.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266869%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266869%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/as-more-swedish-women-went-to-work-fertility-rates-fell-total-fertility-rate-female-labor-force-participation_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Sweden really needed these policies to work. Like many countries today,
it had succeeded in boosting female labor participation, but at the cost
of a decline in births. The government took a distinctly Shinzo-Abe-like
approach, upping the length of parental leave four times in two decades;
by 1994, leave lasted 15 months.

That revived fertility somewhat. However, by the early 1990s, it began
slipping again. Then things got even bleaker: Sweden was hit with a
massive financial crisis, driving [unemployment to 12.9% in Jan.
1995](http://www.riksbank.se/Upload/Dokument_riksbank/Kat_publicerat/Rapporter/1995/inflforv95_feb_eng.pdf)
(pdf) and straining family finances around the country. Female labor
participation began falling, as did the birth rate. Meanwhile, the rate
of fathers taking leave had only risen to about 6%.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266871%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266871%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/sweden-parental-leave-days-taken-mothers-fathers_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Why wasn’t it working? It turned out that allowing parents to choose how
to divvy up childcare time didn’t much change the existing incentives.
As Bengt Westerberg, who was deputy prime minister in 1995, [told the
New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/10/world/europe/10iht-sweden.html?_r=3&pagewanted=all&)
(paywall), Swedish women faced a vicious cycle. Since women’s pay was at
that time typically much lower than their husbands’, couples typically
opted for the mother to stay at home with the child. But that
perpetuated the pay gap, as women continued to be “mommy-tracked,”
penalized for the possibility that they’d bear a child. Companies
entrenched this divide by looking down on fathers who did take parental
leave. Again, this is exactly what’s going on in Japan today.

“Society is a mirror of the family,” Westerberg told the Times. “The
only way to achieve equality in society is to achieve equality in the
home. Getting fathers to share the parental leave is an essential part
of that.”

So in 1995, the government rolled out “daddy leave.” It didn’t make
paternity leave mandatory, but couples lost a month of subsidized leave
if the father took less than a month off. That meant he could no longer
transfer all of his leave to his wife. The new policy also compensated
fathers and mothers at 90% of their wages, making it harder for fathers
to turn down.

“Society is a mirror of the family. The only way to achieve equality in
society is to achieve equality in the home.”

And it worked. Within a few years, more than four out of every five
fathers stayed at home. And when the government added another month to
“daddy leave” in 2002, the amount of time they took off more than
doubled. The government also upped the reimbursement ceiling to make the
package more attractive to high-earning men.

As it stands now, each parent gets a [60-day “daddy” and “mommy”
quota](http://www.leavenetwork.org/fileadmin/Leavenetwork/Country_notes/2014/Sweden.pdf)
(pdf, p.2) paid at 78% of earnings—all of which must be taken. After
that, the couple has 270 days paid at 78% of earnings to split as they
choose, followed by another 90 paid at a flat rate. Parents also get
additional part-time leave and the right to flexible hours up until
their child is eight years old.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266883%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266883%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/double-the-dads-taking-leave-women-men_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

Now nine in 10 Swedish fathers take leave, for an average of three to
four months each, accounting for a quarter of total leave time taken,
and smoothing the mother’s transition back to work.

One reason this works is that Sweden pays generous benefits for a
relatively short period of leave. Instead of encouraging women to spend
a long time out of the workforce, it institutionalizes a set time when
they must return to work or lose their paychecks. The addition of daddy
leave adds extra time that an infant can spend with its parents.

**Good for children, good for parents, good for the economy**
-------------------------------------------------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270219%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270219%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![DATE IMPORTED:September 23, 2014A man rides his bicycle as he carries
children during World Car-Free Day in Sao Paulo September 22, 2014.
REUTERS/Nacho
Doce](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/paternity-leave-father-brazil-biking.jpg?w=640 "Way more productive in the long run.")Way
more productive in the long run.Reuters/Nacho Doce

What happened as a result? The issue is still controversial, but it
seems that the longer the leave for fathers, the less time women take
out from the job market. A study by the Swedish Institute of Labor
Market Policy Evaluation in 2010 found that a [mother’s future earnings
rose 7%](http://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/45782/1/623752174.pdf)
(pdf, p.35), on average, for each month of parental leave her husband
took. Sweden now has some of the highest rates of working mothers in the
world, with around [nine-tenths of
mothers](http://pure.au.dk//portal/files/32354160/0003192.pdf) (pdf)
returning to work after childbirth. While some economists have worried
that Sweden’s generous leave benefits (in addition to daddy leave) would
penalize women, [that hasn’t
happened](http://www.soc.umu.se/digitalAssets/138/138103_1_2014_grnlund_magnusson.pdf)
(pdf). Research shows that younger female workers [face virtually no
discrimination](https://editorialexpress.com/cgi-bin/conference/download.cgi?db_name=ESPE2014&paper_id=637).

This doesn’t mean Sweden doesn’t have farther to go. Thanks in part to
the disproportionate number of male physicians and its robust finance
industry, Sweden’s pay gap is still relatively high. And as with
everywhere else in the developed world, women also work part-time at
higher rates than men.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266877%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266877%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/share-of-labor-force-with-part-time-jobs-women-men_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

However, Sweden’s part-time work gender gap is much smaller than that of
other countries. And unlike pretty much any other country, Swedish women
who work part-time are paid at the same rate as those who work
full-time, according to [a 2008
study](http://www.gc.cuny.edu/CUNY_GC/media/CUNY-Graduate-Center/PDF/Centers/LIS/gornick-bardasi-femecon-2008.pdf)
(pdf, p.58); some even enjoy a small pay premium.

Around nine-tenths of Swedish mothers return to work after childbirth.

The difference between Sweden and other countries, said the researchers,
was that many of the Swedish women working part-time were still doing
the same job they had in the past—and the same one to which they would
return full-time after their children entered school. To put it another
way, Sweden’s policies made it easier for parents to balance work and
family responsibilities.

Other countries and states have won similar successes to Sweden’s. In
the early 2000s, Iceland expanded parental leave to nine months, with a
daddy quota of three months. Last year, Iceland granted each parent five
months’ leave, with two months split however they choose. Though we’ll
have to wait to see how that plays out, as of 2010, [95 fathers there
took
leave](http://www.leavenetwork.org/fileadmin/Leavenetwork/Country_notes/2014/Iceland.pdf)
(pdf) for every 100 mothers that did. The fathers used roughly a third
of the total parental leave taken, compared with [just 3% in
2000](http://www.leavenetwork.org/fileadmin/Leavenetwork/Seminars/2013/GEydalIGislason.pdf)
(pdf). In Quebec, too, a policy that split parental leave more fairly
upped the likelihood that women returned to employment after leave.

Also worth noting is that Sweden and Iceland have put in place
flexible-hours policies that apply for years after parental leave is
over. In addition to upping the rate and duration at which new mothers
breastfeed, these appear to have helped promote a more general workplace
culture of flexibility that benefits all workers.

**Uneven playing field, uneven pay**
------------------------------------

In summary, giving men an incentive to take paternity leave appears to
do two things for women’s careers: It gets them back in the workforce
quicker, and boosts their long-term earning potential.

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266887%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F266887%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![image](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/women-s-earnings-vs-men-s-germany-iceland-japan-sweden-uk-us-oecd_chartbuilder.png?w=640)

The latter is an important factor in closing the pay gap. This isn’t
just good for women, but good for the economy too. As we saw in the
Japan example, a pay gap discourages highly-educated women in particular
from returning to the workforce full-time after having children. It’s
also lost income for the government in terms of the taxes it would
collect on a full-time salary if the wage gap disappeared.

Of course, something has to foot the bill for slashing that wage gap.
And that something is companies. But while you might assume that they’d
secretly object to paying any employees more, it turns out losing
workers to motherhood isn’t so great for the bottom line.

In California and New Jersey, companies reported that paid maternity
leave policies caused either no change to their bottom line or even cut
training and turnover costs.

First off, it limits the return on investment in those lost workers’
training. It also means a hit to productivity, as companies must spend
on replacing lost employees and then training those new workers. In a
[study in
California](http://www.nationalpartnership.org/research-library/work-family/paid-leave/paid-leave-good-for-business.pdf)
(pdf) and [another in New
Jersey](http://www.cepr.net/documents/nj-fli-2014-06.pdf) (pdf,
p.2)—which, along with Rhode Island, are the only US states to provide
paid parental leave—companies reported that the policies helped them
retain workers and caused either no change to their bottom line, or in
some cases cut training and turnover costs. New mothers in both
California and New Jersey were much more likely to return to work.

If you want women to work, you have to pay for childcare
--------------------------------------------------------

[Share](#)

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270220%2F&text=The+economic+case+for+paternity+leave&via=qz)[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841%2Feconomic-case-for-paternity-leave%2Fi%2F270220%2F)

**Tap image to zoom

![Steve Caniglia holds his six-month-old son, Boden, in San Francisco,
California February 19, 2014. After tumbling more than 8 percent on the
way to record lows after the 2008 financial crisis, the U.S. birth rate
is expected to increase over the next two years for the first time since
2007 as young people gain more confidence to start families because of
the stronger economy, demographers say. Picture taken February 19, 2014.
REUTERS/Robert
Galbraith](http://img.qz.com/2014/09/liberal-dude.jpg?w=640 "The global economy needs more of this guy.")The
global economy needs more of this guy.Reuters/Robert Galbraith

To be sure, one reason Scandinavia was able to pioneer all this is that
its tax rates are already among the world’s steepest. Though
Swedish-style policies will go into effect in the UK in 2015, passing
such sweeping legislation will be harder in European countries under the
yoke of austerity. As for the US, though several senators are pushing
for new legislation on parental leave, financing it will be
controversial; expect outrage from those whose knees jerk in chronic
opposition to Nordic “wealth redistribution.”

But looked at another way, increasing taxes to pay for daddy leave isn’t
wealth redistribution, but simple market economics. If the state wants
men to take time out of the workforce, it has to compete with the
salaries they could earn by staying in the workforce. In other words, it
has to pay them the market rate for work—the work of childcare—that it
has long gotten much more cheaply from women.

This brings us back to the original point. Whether a country needs a
bigger workforce now or down the road, encouraging only women to
specialize in the business of childcare will doom those plans to
failure. It’s hard for women to stay in the workforce when businesses
undervalue their official work and governments undervalue their
childcare. In the long run, countries that make sure parents, regardless
of their gender, can wring the greatest possible value from their time
and skills will be those whose economies and families thrive.

-   [](https://twitter.com/share?text=The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave&url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841&via=qz "Tweet")
-   [](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841 "Share on Facebook")
-   [](http://linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841&title=The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave&summary=Suddenly%20last%20year%2C%C2%A0maternity%20leave%C2%A0got%20a%20makeover%2C%C2%A0courtesy%20of%20a%C2%A0most%C2%A0improbable%20source%3A%20Shinzo%20Abe.%20Japan%26%238217%3Bs%20prime%20minister%C2%A0is%C2%A0synonymous%20with%C2%A0machismo-spiked%20nationalism%20(he%20famously%20denied%20that%20women%C2%A0forced%20into%20sexual%20servitude%20by%20Japanese%20soldiers%20in%20World%20War%20II%20were%C2%A0%26%238220%3Bcoerced%26%238221%3B).%20But%20when%20he%C2%A0unveiled%20his%C2%A0sweeping%20economic%20revival%20plan%2C%20it%20included%C2%A0longer%20leave%20for%20mothers.%20And%20this%20wasn%26%238217%3Bt%20the%20usual%20pastel-hued%20sop%20to%20women%20voters%3B%C2%A0the%20way%20%5B%26hellip%3B%5D "Share on LinkedIn")
-   [](mailto:?subject=Quartz:%20The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave&body=http://qz.com/266841%0A%0ASuddenly%20last%20year%2C%C2%A0maternity%20leave%C2%A0got%20a%20makeover%2C%C2%A0courtesy%20of%20a%C2%A0most%C2%A0improbable%20source%3A%20Shinzo%20Abe.%20Japan%E2%80%99s%20prime%20minister%C2%A0is%C2%A0synonymous%20with%C2%A0machismo-spiked%20nationalism%20%28he%20famously%20denied%20that%20women%C2%A0forced%20into%20sexual%20servitude%20by%20Japanese%20soldiers%20in%20World%20War%20II%20were%C2%A0%E2%80%9Ccoerced%E2%80%9D%29.%20But%20when%20he%C2%A0unveiled%20his%C2%A0sweeping%20economic%20revival%20plan%2C%20it%20included%C2%A0longer%20leave%20for%20mothers.%20And%20this%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20the%20usual%20pastel-hued%20sop%20to%20women%20voters%3B%C2%A0the%20way%20%5B%E2%80%A6%5D%0A%0A "Email")
-   [](whatsapp://send?text=The%20economic%20case%20for%20paternity%20leave:http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F266841 "WhatsApp")

Share this:

[![image](http://ox-d.qz.com/w/1.0/ai?auid=337638&cs=5115492963096&cb=542443f89f57d)](http://ox-d.qz.com/w/1.0/rc?cs=5115492963096&cb=542443f89f57d)

Top News
--------

-   [](http://qz.com/271238/belle-of-last-years-unga-ball-irans-rouhani-is-now-overshadowed-by-enemies-trampling-in-his-backyard/)

    Belle of last year’s UNGA ball, Iran’s Rouhani is overshadowed by enemies trampling in his backyard
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    35 minutes ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271458/cows-actually-really-hate-cowbells/)

    Cows actually really hate cowbells
    ----------------------------------

    21 minutes ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271375/why-it-tastes-better-when-it-costs-more/)

    Heuristics

    Why it tastes better when it costs more
    ---------------------------------------

    1 hour ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271118/chinas-investment-in-infrastructure-is-exactly-what-made-alibabas-ipo-possible/)

    China’s investment in infrastructure is exactly what made Alibaba’s IPO possible
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    6 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271311/the-us-just-created-the-worlds-largest-marine-sanctuary/)

    The US just created the world’s largest marine sanctuary
    --------------------------------------------------------

    44 minutes ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271350/why-customer-service-pays-off-most-when-the-economy-is-positive/)

    Why customer service pays off most when the economy is positive
    ---------------------------------------------------------------

    51 minutes ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271074/how-to-stop-comparing-yourself-to-everyone-else-at-work/)

    break rank

    How to stop comparing yourself to everyone else at work
    -------------------------------------------------------

    6 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/270018/which-countries-ask-google-for-users-data-most-often-in-charts/)

    Which countries ask Google for users’ data most often, and which countries are most successful in getting it
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    7 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/270149/how-to-save-your-preemie-wrap-her-in-a-robot/)

    Bionic Baby

    How to save your preemie: Wrap her in a robot
    ---------------------------------------------

    7 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/270241/perfectionist-microbreweries-may-reverse-japans-slide-into-canned-cocktails/)

    Perfectionist microbreweries may reverse Japan’s slide into canned cocktails
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

    9 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/269677/as-china-eats-into-its-market-indias-toy-industry-pin-hopes-on-e-commerce/)

    toy story

    As China eats into its market, India’s toy industry pins hope on e-commerce
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    11 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271196/xi-jinpings-calls-for-ethnic-tolerance-dont-match-his-governments-actions/)

    Xi Jinping’s calls for ethnic tolerance don’t match his government’s actions
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

    6 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/270847/is-the-breastfeeding-privacy-curtain-on-this-public-bus-in-china-empowering-or-shaming/)

    Is the breastfeeding “privacy curtain” on this public bus in China empowering or shaming?
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    6 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/270321/indias-drug-price-control-regime-just-pulled-off-a-logic-defying-move/)

    shock treatment

    India’s drug price control regime just pulled off a logic defying move
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------

    11 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/271170/the-price-of-a-gray-market-iphone-6-in-china-is-plummeting/)

    The price of a gray market iPhone 6 in China is plummeting
    ----------------------------------------------------------

    8 hours ago

-   [](http://qz.com/270919/when-food-fads-collide-pumpkin-spice-meet-greek-yoghurt/)

    whimsy on a spoon

    When food fads collide: Pumpkin spice, meet Greek yogurt
    --------------------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

-   [](http://qz.com/270909/this-young-mothers-poem-about-her-vanishing-country-stunned-the-worlds-leaders/)

    This young mother’s poem about her vanishing country stunned the world’s leaders
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

-   [](http://qz.com/270449/the-chinese-government-may-have-just-done-alibaba-a-massive-favor/)

    The Chinese government may have just done Alibaba a massive favor
    -----------------------------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

-   [](http://qz.com/271027/uh-oh-irish-property-prices-are-soaring-again/)

    Uh-oh! Irish property prices are soaring again
    ----------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

-   [](http://qz.com/270954/what-google-is-telling-people-who-want-to-be-forgotten/)

    What Google is telling people who want to be forgotten
    ------------------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

-   [](http://qz.com/270938/24-lucky-writers-will-take-part-in-the-first-amtrak-residency/)

    All Aboard

    24 lucky writers will take part in the first Amtrak “residency”
    ---------------------------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

-   [](http://qz.com/270885/apples-new-ios-will-predict-what-you-type-including-it-seems-your-passwords/)

    Apple’s new iOS will predict what you type—including, it seems, your passwords
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

-   [](http://qz.com/270074/the-united-nations-had-a-fashion-show-and-it-was-actually-good/)

    MODEL UN

    The United Nations had a fashion show, and it was actually good
    ---------------------------------------------------------------

    September 24, 2014

Powered by [WordPress.com VIP](http://vip.wordpress.com/)

[Follow](javascript:void(0))

### Follow “Quartz”

Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.

Join 21,383 other followers

[Powered by WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=lof)

![image](http://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6463921&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cj=1)

This website uses technologies not supported by this browser. For the
best experience please upgrade your browser. [Learn more
»](http://upgradeyourbrowser.net/ "External web site")

We're currently experiencing technical problems and working with reduced
functionality. We should be back in full shortly. [Follow us on Twitter
for further updates »](http://twitter.com/quartznews "@quartznews")

Your browser doesn't support Javascript or has it
[disabled](http://www.enable-javascript.com/ "How to enable JavaScript in your browser").
QZ.com works best with Javascript enabled.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://qz.com/266841/economic-case-for-paternity-leave/
