[*Ars*Technica](http://arstechnica.com)
=======================================

[Register](/civis/ucp.php?mode=register) [Log
in](/civis/ucp.php?mode=login&return_to=http%3A%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2F05%2Funiversities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either%2F)

-   [Home](/)
-   [Main Menu](#)

    -   [Information Technology Technology Lab](/information-technology)
    -   [Product News & Reviews Gear & Gadgets](/gadgets)
    -   [Business of Technology Ministry of Innovation](/business)
    -   [Security & Hacktivism Risk Assessment](/security)
    -   [Civilization & Discontents Law & Disorder](/tech-policy)
    -   [The Apple Ecosystem Infinite Loop](/apple)
    -   [Gaming & Entertainment Opposable Thumbs](/gaming)
    -   [Science & Exploration The Scientific Method](/science)
    -   [All Things Automotive Cars Technica](/cars)

    Layout:

    -   [Grid
        View](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/?view=grid)
    -   [Article
        View](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/?view=archive)

    Site Theme
    ----------

    -   [Dark on
        light](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/?theme=light)
    -   [Light on
        dark](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/?theme=dark)

    Explore Ars
    -----------

    -   [Reviews](/reviews/)
    -   [Video](/video/)
    -   [Staff Blogs](/staff/)
    -   [Feature Archive](/features/)
    -   [Staff Directory](/staff-directory/)
    -   [Contact Us](http://arstechnica.com/contact-us/)

    Featured Disciplines
    --------------------

    -   [Photography](/discipline/photography/)
    -   [Productivity](/discipline/productivity/)
    -   [Cloud](/discipline/cloud-2/)
    -   [Gadgets](/discipline/gadgets-3/)
    -   [Tablets](/discipline/tablets-2/)

-   [My Stories: 0](#)

    New Since Last Visit
    --------------------

    [See more news stories](#)

    We Recommend
    ------------

    My Discussions
    --------------

    Log in to track your discussions.

-   [Forums](/civis/)
-   [Subscribe](/subscriptions/)
-   [Jobs](/jobs/)
-   [](/search/)

[Scientific Method / Science & Exploration](http://arstechnica.com/science/)
============================================================================

Universities can’t fulfill the myth, but they can’t become vocational schools either
====================================================================================

Universities come with a mythical mission. But they don't fulfill it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

by [Chris Lee](http://arstechnica.com/author/laserboy/) - May 31, 2014
5:46 pm UTC

-   [Science Policy and
    Education](/discipline/science-policy-and-education)

[226](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/?comments=1 "134 posters participating, including story author.")

Is it time to rethink higher education? I'm someone who went through the
system and I'm now, to a greater or lesser extent, contributing to its
maintenance, so it seems strange that I should advocate its dismantling.
Yet I'm beginning to think that I ought to.

Unlike most rants of this nature, I have no complaints about the modern
standard of education. The myth of falling standards has been with us
since the Roman republic decided that they wanted the south of France as
their personal back garden. If they really were falling for that long,
we would all be living in caves wondering how our fore bearers were able
to create this thing called fire.

Indeed, I think that students today learn a hell of a lot more than I
did in my day. Although I may mourn the fact that Lagrangian mechanics
is now a footnote on the way to a physics degree, that is not a sign of
falling standards, but rather tells us that it is more important to
learn other things to obtain a relevant education.

No, my complaint is that universities do not fill the role that there
were *supposed* to play, and they are very inefficient at fulfilling the
role that they *actually* play.

The rose colored past that never was
------------------------------------

Usually when people extol the virtues of universities, they discuss
teaching people how to think, and how to critically examine evidence and
ideas. The ideal role of this sort of university is to churn out
well-rounded individuals who can think independently. Most people who
despair of today's youth seem to think that these ideal universities are
a casualty of the modern world. The young lads that universities used to
produce—ladies being considered too delicate in nature to actually think
in those days—were supposed to cast a jaundiced eye over society and to
defend against iniquities of government, big business, and, in general,
be superheroes without a secret identity.

My point here is not that this ideal was a bad thing, but that
universities were never intended to be places to develop independent
inquiring minds. And today, universities are ill suited to developing
independent inquiring minds.

In the past, universities really only served two purposes. You can see
this by examining who attended universities, and what those people went
on to do. Traditionally, the university intake was dominated by young
men who had attended private schools. That is, young men from rich
families would be sent to Eaton or Rugby to learn their letters and look
down on everyone else. After a smooth passage through these schools,
they were sent on to Oxford or Cambridge to complete their education.

They didn't really go to university to learn anything much. Instead, the
effect of going to private schools and university was to develop a
circle of close friends who could be relied upon to continue to smooth
each other's passage through life. That was the primary purpose of
university: to give young men a chance to form bonds of friendship that
would serve to secure and increase their family interests in the future.

Which brings us to what these young folk went on to do. Sure, some went
on to specialized professions, such as law or medicine. But, a
significant fraction came from families that were rich and had diverse
interests: a family might own land with tenant farmers, part of a
shipping fleet, a plantation in the Caribbean, and a small Indian
village. To successfully manage diverse interests does not require a
degree in physics, or mathematics, or (heaven forbid) business
management. Even as a younger son with very little in the way of
prospects, a life in government service—invading other nations for fun
and profit—would not benefit from a degree in a specific topic.

This brings us to the second reason for the existence of universities.
Young men, when they have finished high school are still a little too
enthusiastic and impulsive to be given charge of a multimillion dollar
business. So, they were sent to university to mature. Any actual
learning they did was a happy accident.

I think it is pretty easy to see that this model is never going to serve
in terms of creating independent thinkers. The university was a place
that shaped young men to maintain their power and position. Doing so
meant they shouldn't think too critically about the society in which
they lived. Which is not to say that none did, or that none of the
teachers encouraged it. Rather, this type of thinking was present in
what was very much a minority of students, and it was an unintended
positive consequence of the university system.

An educational square peg being driven into a round hole
--------------------------------------------------------

The world has moved on. Although universities still play the networking
role, they have taken on additional responsibilities. The majority of
young people—one of the positive changes was opening up higher education
to women—go to university for *vocational training.* You sign up to do a
degree in physics or medicine or law. And, when you study for a specific
topic, you spend the vast majority of your time treading water in a sea
of necessary details.

I would argue that the majority of university courses are the same. A
degree course in just about any subject doesn't actually provide the
core skills required for independent thought and critical thinking—it
just gives you the background to understand the areas where independent
thought is taking place. The course teachers are so busy trying to cram
those details into student's heads that they have no time to explicitly
teach critical thinking skills.\

### Further Reading

[![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/chalkboard-bad-math-300x100.png)](http://arstechnica.com/science/2012/05/revisiting-why-incompetents-think-theyre-awesome/)

[Revisiting why incompetents think they’re awesome](http://arstechnica.com/science/2012/05/revisiting-why-incompetents-think-theyre-awesome/)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dunning-Kruger study today: The uninformed aren't as doomed as the Web
suggests.

In short, any student who emerges from university with good critical
thinking skills has achieved that by accident, not by the university's
design. I would also argue that the courses that come closest to
achieving the ideal are history, English, and philosophy. This is
probably because the subject matter is, from a "we make stuff and
everything else is fluff" perspective, useless. That allows the students
to focus on the important things like logic, analysis, and the
importance of ingrained societal values.

Even assuming this is true, though, these courses still don't achieve as
much as we would like them to. There is more to critical thinking than
being able to string together a chain of logic in a coherent manner, and
arts subjects are undervalued anyway.

A structural problem
--------------------

The apparent loss of critical thinking is only a small thing—and, as I
will discuss below, not entirely real. The bigger problem is that,
because it is believed that universities have the role of providing some
ideal in education, we devalue the actual teaching part. Yes, teaching
at most universities is no different from open mic night at your local
pub. You might occasionally get someone with the voice of an angel. But
mostly you get Nickelback.

The lack of teaching skills means we are supporting institutions that
not only don't do what we idealize them to do, they don't value and
professionalize the things that we expect them to do well. In fact, we
have gone to extremes to prevent the job of university teaching from
becoming a profession. The most obvious example is hiring adjunct
professors. These are people who are hired for about the same wage as a
fast food server, and are expected to teach physics or philosophy to 18
year olds. They don't get benefits or even long-term contracts. So, in
effect, they never get the chance to develop into highly skilled
teaching professionals. Instead, they spend most of their time worrying
about heating bills and whether they can afford to go to the doctor.

Now, of course, universities will argue that they are research
organizations. And that is true. Universities do value research over
teaching. Meaning that tenured and tenure-track professors, even if they
love teaching, cannot prioritize it, because their administration
requires them to be good researchers. Indeed, if you admit that you are
a middling to average researcher and want to focus on teaching, you
become viewed a burden by your department.

Yet, for the great majority of people, their only interaction with a
university is through the people doing the teaching. It's as if a major
corporation, say General Motors, decided that their public face would
not be their most visible product—hello Chevy Volt—and instead decides
to place the janitorial service front and center. Then, just to top it
off, decided not to train the janitors.

Teaching is not for amateurs
----------------------------

Many universities are starting to take teaching more seriously. However,
this has not extended to the point where they actually acknowledge that
teaching is a profession. Or that teaching techniques are amenable to
scientific study—meaning actual teaching research that can be applied to
developing best practices . Bringing that knowledge to the shop-floor,
so to speak, is a part of the problem that is not being addressed in any
coherent way.

The second part of the problem—teachers are under-valued—is not, to my
knowledge, being addressed at all. A teaching career at a university,
even one that markets itself as a big whoop research university, needs
to be viable and rewarding. And realistically, that means creating two
equally valued career tracks.

By giving professors a choice of career tracks, the university benefits
in two ways. Those who are *really* motivated to teach get the chance to
excel at it, while not struggling to obtain funds to support
underperforming research programs. Students don't end up saddled with
excellent researchers who would rather be in the lab than in the
classroom. Those who love and are good at both will be in the happy
position of having both skill sets acknowledged. And, the university
gets to advertise that it has the best teachers *and* the best
researchers.

Getting critical
----------------

The third part of the problem is more subtle. We assume that critical
thinking skills are rather generic; if you learn them in one domain,
they can be automatically transferred to another. I don't believe that
this is as true as we would like it to be.

The skills we learn in science are very strong on data analysis within a
framework. For instance, if I am analyzing data from an experiment, then
that is usually done within the bounds of an appropriate theory. Even if
I find that my data shows the theory to be wrong, there is usually a
deeper theory or set of principles that can be applied. Even for truly
radical ideas, we fall back on some very fundamental tenets:
conservation of energy, conservation of mass, and causality, to name a
few. Working within these frameworks is the sort of skills that every
scientist can apply to their domains. Indeed, these are the skills that
I would expect students to start picking up during their university
education.

But the skills are not in logic, or gathering evidence, or stringing the
argument together—although these are certainly important. No, the skill
is actually recognizing which framework to use to analyze your data. To
understand what data is important, you also need to understand the
framework and how that data fits (or not) within that framework. What
data is trivial (but necessary)? What data is unnecessary? Which parts
of the framework are important? How significant is this particular piece
of information? These questions can only be answered by having a deep
understanding of the framework yet being willing to question it.

By considering critical thinking skills as some sort of
knowledge-independent toolkit, we are leading students (and ourselves)
astray. The consequences of this are perfectly illustrated in the fact
that [this XKCD cartoon](http://xkcd.com/793/) exists. In short, because
we insist that the skills used to analyze problems are domain
independent, we devalue the deep subject knowledge required to make
those skills useful.

Is there a solution?
--------------------

I don't believe that we can actually do much about this. There are
always those who go on to higher education seeking what is actually a
vocational education: be it science, engineering, or math students, they
are simply seeking a means to a job. Nevertheless, universities remain
one of the only places where young people will encounter new ideas. This
creates a tension: should we give in to the pressure, and become
vocational training centers? After all that is what the majority of
students, parents, employers, and politicians want.

Universities have never met the ideal that we hold them to but, on
balance, I think they are better than the alternatives. Still, I think
we could come closer to meeting that ideal if we acknowledged a few
small facts. We should recognize that teaching is a profession that
requires training and career development, so we need to provide a path
for such at higher education. We should be explicit in acknowledging
that critical thinking skills, logic, and reasoning, are not
sufficient—domain knowledge matters. And, just as importantly, we need
to teach people to recognize when they run up against the limits of the
domains they know well.

[Expand full
story](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/)

[Reader comments
226](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/?comments=1)

You must [login or create an account](/civis/ucp.php?mode=login) to
comment.

-   [Share](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2F05%2Funiversities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either%2F)
-   [Tweet](https://twitter.com/share?text=Universities+can%E2%80%99t+fulfill+the+myth%2C+but+they+can%E2%80%99t+become+vocational+schools+either&url=http%3A%2F%2Fars.to%2F1hhXTOA)
-   [Google](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http%3A%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2F05%2Funiversities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either%2F)
-   [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/submit?url=http%3A%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2F05%2Funiversities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either%2F&title=Universities+can%E2%80%99t+fulfill+the+myth%2C+but+they+can%E2%80%99t+become+vocational+schools+either)

[![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/authors/chris-lee2-sq.jpg)](/author/laserboy)

[Chris Lee](/author/laserboy) / Chris writes for Ars Technica's science
section. A physicist by day and science writer by night, he specializes
in quantum physics and optics. He lives and works in Eindhoven, the
Netherlands.

[@exMamaku on Twitter](https://twitter.com/exMamaku)

[← Older
Story](http://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2014/05/how-can-i-make-sure-that-im-actually-learning-how-to-program/)

[Newer Story
→](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/05/pirate-bay-co-founder-peter-sunde-arrested-in-sweden/)

You May Also Like
-----------------

-   [](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/283790414;110588296;n)

    ![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/themes/arstechnica/assets/images/frs/cisco-sponsor-ribbn.png)
    ![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/themes/arstechnica/assets/images/sponsor/cisco-cloud-thumb.png)

    Sponsored: Measuring growth in the cloud

-   [](http://arstechnica.com/sponsored/how-to-prevent-sports-injuries-use-predictive-analytics/)

    ![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/themes/arstechnica/assets/images/frs/ibm-sponsor-ribbn.png)
    ![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/ibm-waratahs-300x150.jpg)

    Sponsored: How to prevent sports injuries? Use predictive analytics

Latest Feature Story
--------------------

[![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/game-of-phones-300x100.jpg)](http://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2014/08/the-state-of-android-updates-whos-fast-whos-slow-and-why/)

Feature Story (3 pages)
-----------------------

The state of Android updates: Who’s fast, who’s slow, and why
=============================================================

Naming and shaming (sometimes praising) the update efforts of OEMs and
carriers.

Watch Ars Video
---------------

![image](http://brightcove.vo.llnwd.net/d21/unsecured/media/636468927001/201408/445/636468927001_3738600497001_htcOne-windows3.jpg?pubId=636468927001)

[](http://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2014/08/hands-on-with-the-htc-one-m8-for-windows-the-first-os-agnostic-phone/)

Hands On with the HTC One M8 for Windows: The first OS-agnostic phone
=====================================================================

The same One M8 that ran Android now runs Windows Phone, exclusively on
Verizon.

Stay in the know with
---------------------

-   [](https://www.facebook.com/arstechnica)
-   [](https://twitter.com/arstechnica)
-   [](https://plus.google.com/+ArsTechnica/posts)
-   [](http://arstechnica.us1.list-manage.com/subscribe?u=af7f013bad7e785d15aab736f&id=0adf3ee3d9)
-   [](/rss-feeds/)

Latest News
-----------

1.  [](http://arstechnica.com/security/2014/08/ups-says-51-stores-infected-with-credit-card-stealing-malware/)

    What's my tracking number?
    --------------------------

    UPS says 51 stores infected with credit card stealing malware
    =============================================================

2.  [![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/republicans-and-democrats-150x150.jpg)](http://arstechnica.com/business/2014/08/fcc-republican-wants-to-let-states-block-municipal-broadband/)

    FCC Republican wants to let states block municipal broadband
    ============================================================

3.  [![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/6757867273_9da5ec1a01_b-150x150.jpg)](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/08/reddit-nixes-new-subreddit-advertising-high-end-counterfeit-us-dollars/)

    reddit nixes new subreddit advertising high-end counterfeit US dollars
    ======================================================================

4.  [](http://arstechnica.com/security/2014/08/latest-gameover-botnet-lays-low-looking-to-resist-takedown/)

    being stealthy
    --------------

    Latest Gameover botnet lays low, looking to resist takedown
    ===========================================================

5.  [](http://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2014/08/how-twitters-new-botmaker-filter-flushes-spam-out-of-timelines/)

    tweetspam
    ---------

    How Twitter’s new "BotMaker" filter flushes spam out of timelines
    =================================================================

6.  [](http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/08/vancouver-man-creeped-out-by-drone-buzzing-near-his-36th-story-condo/)

    Good day, eh
    ------------

    Vancouver man creeped out by drone buzzing near his 36th-story condo
    ====================================================================

Site Links
----------

-   [About Us](/about-us/)
-   [Advertise with us](/advertise-with-us/)
-   [Contact Us](/contact-us/)
-   [Reprints](/reprints/)

Subscriptions
-------------

-   [Subscribe to Ars](/subscriptions/)

More Reading
------------

-   [RSS Feeds](/rss-feeds/)
-   [Newsletters](/newsletters/)

Conde Nast Sites
----------------

-   [Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/)
-   [Wired](http://www.wired.com/)
-   [Vanity Fair](http://www.vanityfair.com/)
-   [Style](http://www.style.com/)
-   [Details](http://www.details.com/)

Visit our sister sites - - - - - - - - - - - - - - GQ Concierge
Epicurious Men.Style.com Style.com Wired.com Lipstick.com NutritionData
Allure Architectural Digest Bon Appétit Brides Condé Nast Portfolio
Glamour Golf Digest Golf World Lucky Self Teen Vogue The New Yorker
Vanity Fair W

Subscribe to a magazine View All Titles - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Allure Architectural Digest Bon Appétit Brides Condé Nast Portfolio
Condé Nast Traveler Details Elegant Bride Glamour Golf Digest Golf World
GQ Lucky Modern Bride Self Teen Vogue The New Yorker Vanity Fair Vogue W
Wired

[View Mobile Site](http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/?view=mobile)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

© 2014 Condé Nast. All rights reserved\
 Use of this Site constitutes acceptance of our [User
Agreement](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy) (effective 1/2/14)
and [Privacy
Policy](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy)
(effective 1/2/14), and [Ars Technica Addendum (effective
5/17/2012)](/amendment-to-conde-nast-user-agreement-privacy-policy/)\
 [Your California Privacy
Rights](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-california)\
 The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed,
transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written
permission of Condé Nast.\
\
 [Ad
Choices](http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-optout)![image](http://cdn.arstechnica.net/wp-content/themes/arstechnica/assets/images/ad_choices_arrow.png)

Log In
------

Username or Email: Password:

Keep me logged in

[Forgot your
password?](https://arstechnica.com/civis/ucp.php?mode=sendpassword) |
[Resend activation
e-mail](https://arstechnica.com/civis/ucp.php?mode=resend_act)

Register an Account
-------------------

Don't have an Ars account? It’s fast and easy to register for one.

Need to register for a new account?
-----------------------------------

If you don't have an account yet it's free and easy.

[Register](https://arstechnica.com/civis/ucp.php?mode=register)

[![image](http://condenast.112.2o7.net/b/ss/condenet-dev/1/H.15.1--NS/0)](http://www.omniture.com "Web Analytics")

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://arstechnica.com/science/2014/05/universities-cant-fulfil-the-myth-but-they-cant-become-a-vocational-school-either/
