User Experience at Hello Erik

[HelloErik Experience Design](/) **

-   [Home](http://www.helloerik.com/ "Home")
-   [Blog](http://www.helloerik.com/blog "Blog")
-   [About](http://www.helloerik.com/about-me "About")
-   [Contact](http://www.helloerik.com/contact "Contact")
-   [**](http://www.helloerik.com/feed "<i class="fa fa-rss"></i>")

The Subtle Magic Behind Why the Bootstrap 3 Grid Works
======================================================

by [Erik Flowers](http://www.helloerik.com/author/admin "Erik Flowers")
| November 5, 2013

Things like CSS grids should remain behind the curtain. No one really
needs to know how it works, or why. Until you have a broken design or
something complex and you can’t figure out why your spacing, margins,
paddings etc are all messed up. It can be a real pain, especially when
you are generating content dynamically in some sort of interface that
changes and shifts.

I’ve seen a number of people confused or irritated at how the bootstrap
grid works. I’ve explained it a bunch of times, and it always makes
sense afterwards. So I’d like to quickly and visually explain **why**
the Bootstrap grid works, not necessarily how. Let’s check out this one
weird trick about how Bootstrap does its magic.

Container
---------

The container has 2 purposes:

1.  To provide the width constraints on responsive widths. When the
    responsive sizes change, it’s the container that changes. Rows and
    columns are all percentage based so they don’t need to change.
2.  To provide padding so the content doesn’t touch the edge of the
    browser. This is 15px on each side as seen in pink in the image.
    This is explained more later.

You never need another container inside of a container. Never. You’ll
see why.

![image-1](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-1.png)\
 Row
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The row provides the columns a place to live, ideally having columns
that add up to 12. It also acts as a wrapper since all the columns float
left, additional rows don’t have overlaps when floats get weird.

Rows also have a unique aspect of having 15px of negative margin on each
side, as seen in blue in the image below. The div that makes up the row
would normally be constrained inside of the containers padding, touching
the edges of the pink area but not beyond. The 15px negative margins
push the row out over top of the containers 15px padding, essentially
negating it. Why? Because of how the columns work as we’ll see next.

Never use a row outside a container, it won’t work.

![image-2](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-2.png)

Column
------

The columns now have 15px padding, seen in yellow. This padding means
that the columns actually touch the edge of the row, which itself
touches the edge of the container since the row has the negative margin,
and the container has the positive padding. But, the padding on the
column pushes anything inside the column in to where it needs to be, and
also provides the 30px gutter between columns.

Never use a column outside of a row, it won’t work.

![image-3](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-3.png)

Content Within a Column
-----------------------

The column padding is what gives your content the space it needs to not
touch the edge of the browser, or the content in the other columns next
to it. This is where the whole container/row/column scheme finally
culminates.

![image-4](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-4.png)

Nesting
-------

When you have a container, row, and column set up, you can make new
grids inside of a column. You add rows right inside the outer columns,
you do not need to use them in containers:

![image-5](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-5.png)

The trick here is that the column acts the same way as a container, it
has 15px of padding that allows the row’s negative 15px of margin to
overlay it… which in turn lets columns inside of this new row touch the
edges, but push the content in with its own 15px padding, which also
creates the gutter, as seen below.

![image-6](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-6.png)

Offsets
-------

Offsets are pretty simple, they just add a left margin to the side of a
column to push it over. Where it gets weird is that the margin pushes
off from the -15px margin on the row when on the far left, and when in
the middle of a row it pushes off from the right side of the preceding
column. It splits and separates the gutters. Other than that, they
behave as columns would regarding how they float, push things around,
etc.

Nothing really to it.

![image-7](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-7.png)

Push and Pull
-------------

Let me start by saying why you push/pull: to flip layouts based on
responsive sizes. Especially good for reordering how columns are laid
out from a mobile design, to the desktop design, as it allows you to
break the HTML top -\> left drawing of divs.

These are more confusing as they actually add positioning to the
columns, not margin. A push adds left positioning, and a pull adds right
positioning. Since they are floated and also contained in a relatively
positioned container, the row, they move to the distance you set, ie
col-sm-push-4, with the positioning.

![image-8](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-8.png)

This is a problem because it can make columns just overlap and not
behave like normal or like an offset. So if you push one to the right,
it’s going to be on top of the one on the right, and vice versa. So
almost always, when you use push/pull, you do complimentary inverses, if
you push a column to the right, you’ll almost always be pulling a column
to the left a complimentary distance.

![image-9](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-9.png)

The Reasoning Behind It
-----------------------

**Container:** The container works this way so that the edges of the
container can have that virtual 15px padding around the content, but not
require the body tag to have a 15px padding. This was a change in the
RC1 of Bootstrap 3. Otherwise, the entire body would have a 15px
padding, which would make non-bootstrap divs and such not touch the
edges, which is bad for full width divs with colored backgrounds.

**Rows:** Rows have negative margin equal to the containers padding so
that they also touch the edge of the container, the negative margin
overlapping the padding. this lets the row not be pushed in by the
container’s padding. Why? Well…

**Columns:** Columns have the 15px padding again so that they finally
truly keep your content 15px away from the edge of the
container/browser/viewport, and also provide the 15px + 15px gutter
between columns. It is like this so that there doesn’t have to be a
special first/last column that doesn’t have padding on the left/right,
like in grids of old (960, blueprint, etc). Now, there is a consistent
15px space between the edges of the columns at all times, no matter
what.

**Nested Rows:** Nested rows work just as above, only now they overlap
the padding of the column they are inside, just like the container.
Essentially, the column is acting as the container, which is why you
never need a container inside of anything.

**Nested Columns:** Nothing is different here now, works the same as
before.

**Offsets:** These essentially split gutter widths to increase the space
between columns by however many column units you want. Very, very
simple.

**Push/Pull:**These make use of positioning to trick HTML into flipping
elements from left to right when going from mobile to desktop sizes. Or,
for when you have a special use-case where offsets don’t work.

Common Problems
---------------

There are a few common problems that come up. Most of these are easily
visible once you know what to look for in your HTML.

**Lack of a Container:**The first is the lack of a container. Not having
a container means that there is no padding for the row’s negative
margins to overlap, meaning now the row pushes outside of its parent
element. This is the most common reason for odd column alignment or
weird horizontal scrolling when you’re close to the edge of the browser,
or have a container with a hidden
overflow.![image-10](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-10.png)

**Lack of Rows:**The next similar problem is not having a row. This goes
in the opposite direction as now you have double padding on your edges,
meaning now instead of the 15px between the edge of your
browser/viewport, you’ll have 30px. And, your columns won’t float right
and you’ll have weird float overlaps since there’s not the row there to
“clear” the stacked columns.

Also, when you’re trying to nest grids, which is fine, a lack of a row
will also double up the padding, so as you see below there is now 45px
of padding on the left! Rows would fix this so that the nested grid was
only 15px away from the edge of the browser/body as the first row
overlaps the container padding, the first column touches the edge of the
row, the inner row overlaps the outer columns padding, and the inner
inner column touches the edge of that inner row! This is a LOT easier to
see in practice, and you can see it in the nesting image up at the start
of the article.

![image-11](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-11.png)

**Containers Inside of Anything Else:**A container inside of anything
else acts like a column by adding new padding, but also adds all the
responsive widths and snap points that are unique to a container. By
using a container anywhere inside another container, you’re going to
have problems. It is never appropriate and will just cause all sorts of
havok.

![image-12](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-12.png)

**Offset/Push/Pull:** When using offsets and push/pulls, most of these
still apply. Offsets are pretty simple as they just make columns bigger.
Push/Pull is different is that if you make it too big, you can just push
columns outside of their containers. Pretty easy to notice, just use
common sense.

![image-13](http://www.helloerik.com/wp-content/uploads/image-13.png)

Those are some of the most common, basic grid problems. If you’re having
trouble with a design with lots of nesting, or if your varying
responsive layouts aren’t working how you want, go through and see if
you have any of these problems first. If you fix these, often you’ll
solve most of your issue that isn’t related to your custom layouts.

That’s It
---------

This is why the Bootstrap 3 grid works. It’s really clever and provides
an awesome solution most of us don’t realize is taking place. After
many, many years of using grid frameworks, this is the most elegant
solution I’ve used so far. Even though you might look at this and think
it looks convoluted, it’s really using the limitations and abilities of
CSS to give us a dead-simple way to make a grid that makes sense in
practice, if not entirely under scrutiny.

Be sure to check out the other Bootstrap 3 articles: [The Bootstrap 3
Grid
Introduction](http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-grid-introduction)
and [Bootstrap 3 Less Tutorial
Workflow](http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-less-workflow-tutorial)

[**
Tweet](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works&text=The%20Subtle%20Magic%20Behind%20Why%20the%20Bootstrap%203%20Grid%20Works%20via%20@Erik_UX&hashtags=UX)

[**
Share](https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works)

[**
Share](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works)

[**
Share](http://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works&title=The%20Subtle%20Magic%20Behind%20Why%20the%20Bootstrap%203%20Grid%20Works&source=<p>Why%20does%20the%20Bootstrap%203%20grid%20work%20the%20way%20it%20does?%20There’s%20some%20clever%20magic%20going%20on,%20and%20understanding%20why%20Bootstrap%20is%20built%20the%20way%20it%20is%20will%20clear%20up%20a%20lot%20of%20confusion%20and%20help%20you%20understand%20the%20intricacies%20of%20what%20is%20going%20on,%20and%20why%20Bootstrap%20chose%20to%20do%20it%20this%20way.</p>%0A)

![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4cd525388489622d75a0d9153472408b?s=96&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D96&r=G)

Posted by [Erik
Flowers](http://www.helloerik.com/author/admin "Erik Flowers") on
November 5, 2013

I love all things experience design. I work as a Principal Service
Experience Designer at Intuit in Mountain View, CA.

[Follow @Erik\_UX](https://twitter.com/Erik_UX)

-   Pingback: [Bootstrap 3 Grid Introduction | UX at Hello
    Erik](http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-grid-introduction)

-   Pingback: [Bootstrap 3 Less Workflow Tutorial | UX at Hello
    Erik](http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-less-workflow-tutorial)

-   http://www.gsuez.cl Gonzalo Suez

    great article Eric, easy to understand, thanks for sharing!

-   nedux

    Thank you for writing this. It really helped me understand how
    bootstrap3 grid works. You explained it very nicely with colors.

-   Daniel Pinciuc

    awesome, dude!

-   Shinekhuu D

    Great, really helped me understand how bootstrap works. Saves a lot
    of time of mine

-   Philip Holly

    Great explanation and diagrams. I was confused as to why columns
    inside rows inside containers would still effectively yield 15px
    padding on the container. I was thinking the columns should span the
    full width of the container. But now I see that the container is
    meant to always have 15px – no matter what content is in it, whether
    it be rows with columns or not. Followed.

    Do you do contract work?

-   http://theconsciouslife.com/ The Conscious Life

    Brilliant explanation on how bootstrap’s grid system works. It’s so
    much clearer than the official documentation on getbootstrap.com.
    Thanks!

-   http://www.dylanvalade.com/ dylanvalade

    I was unsure why my layouts would need pull or push but you cleared
    it up with your inverse comment.

-   Pingback:
    [http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works
    |
    msarm](http://msarm.wordpress.com/2014/01/15/httpwww-helloerik-comthe-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works/)

-   Karl

    Rarely do I ever leave comments. But your post is so well done I
    just had to say “thank you”. It is clear, well organized and
    straight to the point. No fluff. Much appreciated.

-   http://kristinalemasson.com/ Kristina Lemasson

    I agree with everything Karl said! This post is so much clearer than
    the official documentation, and an enjoyable read, no less. Thank
    you, Erik!

-   Pingback: [Bootstrap 3. Grid system | Yaiza
    Bailén](http://yaizabailen.com/bootstrap-3-grid-system/)

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    All killer, no filler. 24/7yolo.

-   fakeartist

    Excellent article! I have a question though.

    You say that not having a container means that there is no padding
    for the row’s\
     negative margins to overlap, meaning now the row pushes outside of
    its\
     parent element. That’s true. But what I you want to make bootstrap
    full width with rows and columns in it? What should one do in this
    occasion? If I don’t use a container (in order to take full width)
    then I will have problems with any rows that I use in my code.

    Thanks in advance.

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    You can do it like shown here:\

    [http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-grid-introduction\#fluid](http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-grid-introduction#fluid)

    .my-fluid-container {\
     padding-left: 15px;\
     padding-right: 15px;\
     margin-left: auto;\
     margin-right: auto;\
     }

-   WoodyGrape

    Wow this was amazing. I have been using bootstrap a couple months
    and this just perfectly explained exactly how the grid system works.
    This explains it 10x better than the doc does

-   http://johncounsel.biz John Counsel

    Erik, thanks for this. So nice to have someone with a strong sense
    of visual communication explain it in such a simple, comprehensible
    way. :D

-   Whit

    nice work, Erik!

-   Joseph Rex

    This is really awesome. Thanks to guys like you that spend your time
    making life easier for others

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    It’s the little things.

-   darb

    on your bootstrap theme… .about-author .avatar-box img { height:
    100%;

    makes your favicon VERY tall and stretched, right after reading
    about why bootstrap grid works lol

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    i dont see this anywhere. browser?

-   Royce Lithgo

    Brilliant yet again. The mystery of Bootstrap 3 grids is now making
    sense. Thank you!

-   Royce Lithgo

    I have a question regarding the 12 columns. I remember reading
    somewhere on the Bootstrap site that ideally the number of columns
    should add to 12, but then in their grid explanation they have
    examples where it explicitly exceeds 12, which forces the additional
    columns to stack. I’m a little puzzled by this.

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    Columsn can stack inside a row, which is part of responsive design.
    It’s a design decision. You may have a col-md-12 and col-md-12 that
    you want to change to a col-lg-6 col-lg-6. Well, you’d have a
    stacked column setup at md, but side by side at lg.

    Or maybe you want a 6 6 12 at one size; that would give you 2 rows
    of columns in a .row. But then you could change that to any
    variation of 3 at a different size, i.e. a 4 4 4.

    It’s just a way to design. A lot of times there’s no need. But
    remember, this is mobile first design, so EVERY design starts as a
    col-xs-12 in the mobile view, and then builds up into other columns.

    If you want to play around at Shoelace.io, you can sorta get a
    visual of how it works in the editor and also in the preview:
    [http://shoelace.io/\#HQNLMLHL](http://shoelace.io/#HQNLMLHL)

-   Royce Lithgo

    I get it now. Whenever you exceed the 12 column boundary, you’re
    starting a new stacked line (avoiding calling it a row because row
    has special meaning within Bootstrap) within the current row.

    That visual editor at Shoelace.io is brilliant. Easiest way to get a
    handle on all this.

-   david

    Best explanation and set of illustrations I’ve seen!

-   CNARIO

    I see it that way on my playbook.

-   Ji Sames

    Thank you for a great explanation, Erik! You deserve a ‘Grid-Jedi’
    robe.

-   Fred

    This is an awesome review. Thanks for sharing!

-   André Moura

    Muito bom.\
     Excellent…

-   http://www.rightonedesign.co.uk/ Right One Design

    Great article and makes it so clear on how Bootstraps grid works!

-   Pingback: [The Subtle Magic Behind Why the Bootstrap 3 Grid Works |
    Eduardo Akio Fukunari -
    Blog](https://www.edufukunari.com.br/blog/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works/)

-   Jean-Luc Esser

    Terrific piece, thank you so much for writing this.\
     The official bootstrap documentation is misleading (get
    bootstrap.com/css), do you know why ? Column size do not add up :
    12\*60 is 720 ; container size is 750 ; column should be a mix of 62
    and 63 ! And that’s true for every container size (750, 970, 1170).
    Would love to have your take on this !

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    This is an interesting observation.

    Technically, the columns are percentages. 1 column at small is
    8.333333333%, which times 12 is like 99.9996%. So it’s not pixel
    exact, as it’s much easier to use the percents.

    As far as the width including the padding, that’s a point of view
    where do you want to know the usable space inside the column, or the
    width from the gutter edge to edge. The usable space inside a small
    column is 32 pixels roughly.

    This isn’t really accurate though, since if you do a 6 column small
    col, 32×6 is only 192px. So you have to add the gutters, minus 30.
    So that’s 372px minus 30, for 342px. But the actual width is 345px.

    It will never be perfect as the cols are percents, and the paddings
    are pixels.

    So, the width of a column in pixels really isn’t that useful if you
    want to be super accurate. Even in the doc, 60px times 6 is 360px,
    but the actual usable space is 345px. Regardless, I don’t really see
    any issue with this, unless you’re trying to make something like an
    image the exact width.

-   rafark

    Supernice! I don’t usually comment in blogs like most people, but
    your explanation was fantastic! Thank you so much.

-   gwhosubex

    Now I have another great example of clear teaching to model

-   Orlando

    Wow! Simple and elegant explanation!

-   Filippo Mangione

    Simple and comprehensive explaination. Thanks.

-   Peter Barnes

    Thank you SO MUCH for this fantastic explanation of this concept! I
    was having enormous amounts of trouble with the gutters but the
    problem was that I wasn’t using a container!

-   JamesNV

    Another gotcha: if you have a row, you NEED a column. Never put
    content in a row.

-   Tharanga Nuwan Kumara

    I totally agree with Karl. Just I need to tell “Thank YOU”….. THANK
    YOU so much…

-   http://www.gastronomicfightclub.com/ snekse

    What did you use for your wireframe images?

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    It is simple Illustrator boxes with one of the factory stroke styles
    applied.

-   Dmitri

    Some great explanations here! It can be frustrating to fight through
    the massive jungle of Bootstrap’s declaration, and they can really
    do better explaining what individual classes actually do. I am still
    puzzled why they still use \`floats\` for the layout (together with
    the hacky “clearfix” caused by it), whereas \`display:
    inline-block\` seems to be the recommended practice.

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    I have never thought about it, but I am assuming it has to do with
    the mobile-first CSS structure and how the push/pull works for
    flipping sides based on the media query width you want your columns
    set to.

    This is a guess, and also something I doubt I’ll try to test =P

-   Dmitri

    Thanks, I wish Bootstrap was more open. After several hours work I
    got a very simple Navbar that seem basically to do what their
    Navbar:
    [http://jsbin.com/xeniyi/1/edit](http://jsbin.com/xeniyi/1/edit).
    Why can’t they make it so simple? Their example are full of custom
    declarations, which does not look clean to meet. A good framework
    should take away the pain of making those declaration in first
    place. Of course, one may want to tweak things, but they should not
    be in the “official examples” that should focus on showing how the
    framework works, not how it needs to be “fixed”.

-   Pingback: [Bootstrap 3 grid system illustrated & explained | just
    some
    notes](http://olivergaspar.wordpress.com/2014/06/01/bootstrap-3-grid-system-illustrated-explained/)

-   http://memeLab.com.au/ Tim Osborn

    wow.. shoelace rocks!

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    Care to elaborate on what you like and what you think of the concept
    and usability?

-   http://memeLab.com.au/ Tim Osborn

    Its snappy and sexy, for one thing!

    the very best thing about bootstrap IMHO is the grid system (forms
    are super handy, too – a form builder would be a strong progression
    if you’re developing the tool), and your tool focusses on that in a
    mac’ish ‘do one thing well’ fashion.

    I love that you’re building the layout with less mixins… looking at
    it this way makes it abundantly clear to those new to BS that you
    should religiously nest \`.container \> .row \> .col\* \> .row \>
    .col\*\`. That’s a super clear takeaway!

    Having seen how clean that layout is without ‘presentational’
    styles, I’ll change the way I prototype as a result – hoist the
    abstract structure up top.

    Shoelace is prob best on a larger monitor than my MBP (there’s a
    little horizontal scroll in the main body) which is confusing (and
    chrome wants to navigate back on two finger drag). Just checked,
    zooming out one notch eliminates the scroll for me… I’d prefer a
    smaller interface.

    The little head twist is the clicking of buttons/panels at left to
    preview the grid rendered at different sizes – my normal model for
    this is to drag the right side of the screen (chrome devtools border
    or FF responsive mode)… maybe clicking the panels could trigger a
    representative / symbolic change in the width of the main col?

    I’d love to see some big hovers on ‘duplicate’, ‘reset to full
    wdith’ (is that what the refresh icon does?) and the offset grippy –
    i missed that first time!

    a nice addition might be a get started button / popover that could
    offer a tour / gif / dummy data, as a blank screen might make this
    less accessible to newcomers…

    A peripheral value add you might consider would be offering html5
    markup suggestions, poss with basic validation (eg: only one main
    tag per page). An outline view analogous to your left hand panels,
    or sweet code structure would help folk comprehend “sectioning”
    content and where to fit in the non semantic elements that bootstrap
    requires (we still often need wrappers, right! esp with nesting
    cols) eg \`section.row\>article.grid-item.col-sm-4\*12\`

    anyway, enough suggestions – they’re only coming up because shoelace
    is worth it :)

    thanks for the tool, and i’ve really appreciated you explanations of
    BS – they’re the best I’ve read. Best wishes, Tim

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    That’s great feedback. I agree with almost all of it.

    One things to ask, is that did you see the preview button at the
    top? It will render your grid in a real HTML layout where you can
    actually drag it back and forth and see the literal size changes and
    responsiveness. When you hit save up at the top, it gives you a
    preview button. (this seems to be broken right now… not sure why).

    Sadly, the Shoelace.io codebase is all written in Clojure, which
    compiles down to the clojurescript/javascript. The developer who
    built it all is not really available to work on it, so it’s probably
    as done as it’s gonna get.

-   http://memeLab.com.au/ Tim Osborn

    Ah! I don’t see preview, but that sounds like what I was looking
    for! Code: Yeah – I took a peak and it looks scary complex :)

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    I’ll see if I Can get him to eyeball what is wrong. Likely has to do
    how we save the designs to a public github Gist… API might have
    changed.

    Regarding the clojurescript – that’s just compiled code, it’s
    javascript but not meant to be readable by a human. Clojure is the
    actual language pre compiled, and it’s super readable and awesome.
    It’s based on Lisp.

    I may just make the repo public and see if anyone ever wants to mess
    with it or work on it. Probably not, but oh well. Most Clojure guys
    are super busy and important changing the world.

-   Andreas

    Very nicely explained! Thanks!

-   Deeps

    This is so helpfull to understand the bootstrap Grid System. Thank
    You a bunch Erik for sharing this with us.

-   Chener

    Wow, Thank YOU!

-   Brian R Cline

    This is possibly the best description of how bootstrap grid’s system
    works.

    Absolutely fantastic, detailed, and useful. Love the diagrams.

-   xpera

    superb!!!

-   http://www.downloadcrunch.com/ Sainik Biswas

    This is better than the Bootstrap doc on grids. Thanks :)

-   inversechi

    I to rarely comment on anything but I just felt like saying thanks
    for such an informative post!

-   http://www.knyshov.com/ Leonid S. Knyshov

    Thank you, this should be part of Bootstrap docs. I am not original
    in making this statement, but it needs to be made. :)

-   http://www.edpichler.com/ Mr Pichler

    Very good!

-   Nichochar

    Great explanation, thanks

-   Steven Garrity

    Thanks for putting this together. It would be nice to have some of
    this rationale in the official Bootstrap documentation. I’m going to
    turn this into a presentation for my co-workers. Thanks again.

-   http://webplatformdaily.org Šime Vidas

    What if you wanted the gutter between columns to be the same width
    as the padding to the edge of the screen? E.g. in the “Columns”
    screenshot, gutter = 30px, but screen edge padding = 15px. How would
    I achieve the same value for both? (I’m not a Bootstrap user.)

-   sadewqfwefq

    dd

-   http://www.fixedbyvonnie.com/ Vonnie Hudson

    Excellent explanation! I’ve always struggled to understand this but
    your explanation was lucid

-   Niko Lowry

    Bootstrap has one of the most bloated grid frameworks ever. While I
    agree with the concept of “bootstrapping”, I feel like Twitter has
    interns implementing the code base.

    For example, you have a diagram pointing out the negative margins to
    do the padding; which is completely unnecessary and a BAD practice.
    negative margins, and even margins not originating from either the
    top or left are reserved for EXTREME circumstances and should not be
    the foundation of a styling framework.

    Additionally, I don’t remember the last site I did that “snapped” w
    breakpoints. Everything I’ve coded in the past 2 to 3 years have
    been fluid width, clients want their site to fill out every screen.
    Which makes dealing with bootstrap a nightmare.

-   lipegon

    Agreed! Thank you! :)

-   http://niteodesign.com/ Blake Petersen

    Foundation, baby

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    Twitter never actually had anything to do with this. It was people
    who worked at twitter doing it in their off time, and used it for
    prototyping at work.

    The margin/padding really is about making the grid work across the
    huge non-edge case majority. It does work, and a “bad practice’ in
    CSS and HTML is funny as almost everything we do in HTML and CSS is
    a hack and bad practice.

    Using 100% width fluid designs in bootstrap is a 1 line Less mixin.

-   Niko Lowry

    Erik so you really prefer this:\
     /\* Bootstrap \*/\
     .container {\
     /\*for diff padding you’d have to do padding-right/padding-left or
    padding !important \*/\
     padding-right: 15px;\
     padding-left: 15px;\
     margin-right: auto;\
     margin-left: auto;\
     }

    .row {\
     /\*any el that’s position absolute (i.e: img bg) will start at
    -15px rather than our real 0\*/\
     margin-right: -15px;\
     margin-left: -15px;\
     }

    Instead of something like this (better example w/ cols here:
    [http://jsfiddle.net/nikolowry/7JnrR/](http://jsfiddle.net/nikolowry/7JnrR/)
    ):\
     /\*Clearfix\*/\
     .container, .row{\
     \*zoom: 1;\
     }

    .container:before, .container:after,\
     .row:before, .row:after{\
     content: ” “;\
     display: table;\
     }

    .container:after, .row:after {\
     clear: both;\
     }

    /\*Center and external padding\*/\
     .container {\
     margin:0 auto;\
     /\*now padding can easily be overwritten, instead of extra prop
    targeting\*/\
     padding:0 15px;\
     }

    .row{\
     display:block;\
     }

-   http://www.helloerik.com/ Erik Flowers

    You’re pasting in CSS that is never seen. The only things I see are
    my own less files. Bootstrap is a Less set of tools, I’ve never even
    exported CSS as un-minified since using Bootstrap and Less.

    I guess I prefer to see it as how it’s actually used – you import
    bootstrap.less from it’s own folder, then build your own Less for
    your customized layouts and designs as you see fit. Most people
    never need to see or know how the grid mixins and math Bootstrap
    uses to build the bootstrap CSS.

    So to answer your questions – I don’t prefer either. I prefer (if I
    ever even look at it)

    .container-fixed(@gutter: @grid-gutter-width) {\
     margin-right: auto;\
     margin-left: auto;\
     padding-left: (@gutter / 2);\
     padding-right: (@gutter / 2);\
     &:extend(.clearfix all);\
     }

    or

    .make-row(@gutter: @grid-gutter-width) {\
     margin-left: (@gutter / -2);\
     margin-right: (@gutter / -2);\
     &:extend(.clearfix all);\
     }

    But why would anyone care about that? That’s like cracking open the
    jQuery source and critiquing it. Most people just want to do
    .onClick and .toggleClass and who cares how it works.

-   Niko Lowry

    The analogy to jQuery is totally offbase. If your event doesn’t
    bubble or produce an error, then all the matters is the callback.
    The .container, .row and every other “base” class has an impact
    globally on nearly every element. Do you not open dev tools to
    inspect css? A clear example is if you’ve ever had to position
    something absolute inside a row and have to use 15px instead of 0px.

    And I don’t “see” those mixins or base styles either, I have a
    custom reset, custom grid and global stylesheet that contains my own
    “bootstrap”. But just because you don’t actively see the css files,
    doesn’t mean you should be oblivious to what’s going on under the
    hood because it could cause bugs/or extra lines of code to
    overwrite.

    With my code example above, I was directly addressing your comment
    “The margin/padding really is about making the grid work across the
    huge non-edge case majority.” Instead of using weird margins, I
    showed a proof of concept how to do it while still respecting the
    traditional box-model.

-   judo

    Awesome post! The only thing I would have liked is accompanying code
    examples.

-   bestar15scopes

    Wow, what a great explanation. This is so well written and helpful.
    Thanks for this!

-   Lucas Bonnet

    Thank you very much for this post, it helped fix all the aberrant
    bugs in my application. In a few minutes, I was then able to
    understand the mistakes I made and fix them.

-   Joshua McDonald

    @nikolowry:disqus – Can you explain to me, outside of superfluous
    “its not best practice”, a practical reason why there is something
    wrong with bootstrap’s approach? I get a lot of opinionated best
    practice – a la Crockford, Resig or the entire Rails community – but
    not a lot of reason why… Margins work on all sides just fine – the
    idea to use them on top/left is simply so you dont have to think
    about it later… but as Erik said above, you never see that code
    really – its not in your FOV and frankly, you shouldn’t be dicking
    with the margins of the framework so the “how” of the framework
    should be rather unimportant to you.

    If you simply prefer your version of best practice, than by all
    means, do what works for you – “best practice” to me is the method
    that gives the client what they want, in a quality manner, in the
    least amount of time without sacrificing the end product. And, like
    everything in the modern development world, there is no de-facto
    “best practice” to begin with… so please dont present it as fact.

    I’m actually not a huge fan of bootstrap – I use it for prototyping,
    but in production prefer foundation (Bootstrap has more built-ins,
    its like making wireframes for prototypes is where it shines) … but
    aside from the minor nitpick of rows afecting position absolute on
    children (and I say minor because for me, “best practice” has always
    been to have the container of something I absolute position be
    something I created – i just dont absolute a direct child in a
    .row), I really dont see any actual, quantifiable reason to say its
    flat wrong, other than you just dont personally like it

-   superkershaw

    Hi Erik, I also really appreciate this well written article, I was
    wondering if you have any experience with foundation and would have
    any interest in analysis their grid system as well? From what I can
    tell it operates similarly in concept, but I’ve found myself
    struggling with horizontal scroll bars on the window and such… For
    example, to make the grid full window width in foundation requires
    your own CSS.

-   http://toddgallimore.com/ Todd Gallimore

    This has finally cleared it up. Thank you! I was just getting
    confused on how the gutters works. But negative margin on the row
    makes total sense. Thanks again!

-   Bert

    Thank You!

-   mue

    Good explanation. Thanks!

[←
Previous](http://www.helloerik.com/the-first-tajriba-bringing-ux-to-africa)

[Next →](http://www.helloerik.com/design-for-delight-has-no-match)

### Bootstrap Series

-   [Bootstrap 3 Grid
    Introduction](http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-grid-introduction "Permalink to: Bootstrap 3 Grid Introduction")

-   [Bootstrap 3 Less Workflow
    Tutorial](http://www.helloerik.com/bootstrap-3-less-workflow-tutorial "Permalink to: Bootstrap 3 Less Workflow Tutorial")

-   [The Subtle Magic Behind Why the Bootstrap 3 Grid
    Works](http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works "Permalink to: The Subtle Magic Behind Why the Bootstrap 3 Grid Works")

### Latest Posts

-   [No one said they wanted faster horses, they wanted less
    horseshit](http://www.helloerik.com/no-one-said-they-wanted-faster-horses-they-wanted-less-horseshit)
    June 1, 2014
-   [Everything New](http://www.helloerik.com/everything-new) April 5,
    2014
-   [Change Your Language and Reframe Why You Interact With
    Customers](http://www.helloerik.com/change-your-language-and-reframe-why-you-interact-with-customers)
    January 17, 2014
-   [The Service Design of
    Coffee](http://www.helloerik.com/the-service-design-of-coffee)
    December 31, 2013
-   [View on UX](http://www.helloerik.com/view-on-ux) December 22, 2013
-   [Design for Delight has No
    Match](http://www.helloerik.com/design-for-delight-has-no-match)
    December 12, 2013
-   [The Subtle Magic Behind Why the Bootstrap 3 Grid
    Works](http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works)
    November 5, 2013

[** Subscribe with RSS](http://www.helloerik.com/feed/)

### Categories

-   [All
    Posts](http://www.helloerik.com/category/all-posts "View all posts filed under All Posts")
-   [Bootstrap
    Series](http://www.helloerik.com/category/bootstrap-series "View all posts filed under Bootstrap Series")
-   [Core
    UX](http://www.helloerik.com/category/core-ux "View all posts filed under Core UX")
-   [HTML and
    CSS](http://www.helloerik.com/category/html-and-css "View all posts filed under HTML and CSS")
-   [Psychology](http://www.helloerik.com/category/psychology "View all posts filed under Psychology")
-   [Service
    Design](http://www.helloerik.com/category/service-design "View all posts filed under Service Design")
-   [TajRiba](http://www.helloerik.com/category/tajriba-posts "View all posts filed under TajRiba")
-   [User
    Experience](http://www.helloerik.com/category/user-experience "View all posts filed under User Experience")

Experience and design zealot. Working to bring better products,
services, and experiences into the world.

[say hello](mailto:erik@helloerik.com)

[@Erik\_UX](https://twitter.com/Erik_UX)

[Follow me on Twitter
**](https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=Erik_UX)

[Follow @Erik\_UX](https://twitter.com/Erik_UX)

### helloerik.com

The UX blog of Erik Flowers.

[** HelloErik RSS Feed](http://www.helloerik.com/feed/)

Built with [Bootstrap 3](http://www.getbootstrap.com) on the [Hybrid
Base Framework](http://www.themehybrid.com). Designed and coded with
love.

### Get In Touch

It's always a good time to contact me:
[erik@helloerik.com](mailto:erik@helloerik.com)

[** Connect on LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/in/erikflowers)

[** @Erik\_UX on Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/Erik_UX)

[** erikflowers on Github](https://github.com/erikflowers)

### Recent Writings

-   [No one said they wanted faster horses, they wanted less
    horseshit](http://www.helloerik.com/no-one-said-they-wanted-faster-horses-they-wanted-less-horseshit)
-   [Everything New](http://www.helloerik.com/everything-new)
-   [Change Your Language and Reframe Why You Interact With
    Customers](http://www.helloerik.com/change-your-language-and-reframe-why-you-interact-with-customers)
-   [The Service Design of
    Coffee](http://www.helloerik.com/the-service-design-of-coffee)
-   [View on UX](http://www.helloerik.com/view-on-ux)
-   [Design for Delight has No
    Match](http://www.helloerik.com/design-for-delight-has-no-match)

### Categories

-   [All
    Posts](http://www.helloerik.com/category/all-posts "View all posts filed under All Posts")
-   [Bootstrap
    Series](http://www.helloerik.com/category/bootstrap-series "View all posts filed under Bootstrap Series")
-   [Core
    UX](http://www.helloerik.com/category/core-ux "View all posts filed under Core UX")
-   [HTML and
    CSS](http://www.helloerik.com/category/html-and-css "View all posts filed under HTML and CSS")
-   [Psychology](http://www.helloerik.com/category/psychology "View all posts filed under Psychology")
-   [Service
    Design](http://www.helloerik.com/category/service-design "View all posts filed under Service Design")
-   [TajRiba](http://www.helloerik.com/category/tajriba-posts "View all posts filed under TajRiba")
-   [User
    Experience](http://www.helloerik.com/category/user-experience "View all posts filed under User Experience")

### Search

### Share

[**
Tweet](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works&text=The%20Subtle%20Magic%20Behind%20Why%20the%20Bootstrap%203%20Grid%20Works%20via%20@Erik_UX&hashtags=UX)

[**
Share](https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works)

[**
Share](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works)

[**
Share](http://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works&title=The%20Subtle%20Magic%20Behind%20Why%20the%20Bootstrap%203%20Grid%20Works)

Back to top

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.helloerik.com/the-subtle-magic-behind-why-the-bootstrap-3-grid-works
