\

In the early days of SQL, one of the objections to the relational
approach to data was that it could not handle hierarchies and tree
structures. In those days, IMS from IBM was the major storage tool in
large corporations. It still is.

IMS is a pure tree structure that the user navigates. This was the basis
for all serious, large-scale DP work, so people assumed that if SQL
could not handle such structures, it would never be a serious production
tool. You might use it for a reporting tool or something off to the
side, but not as the main database for the enterprise.

Well, IMS is still out there and it holds a lot of data, but SQL has
moved into serious production databases. As it turned out, the problem
was not that SQL could not model hierarchies. The problem was
programmers had to learn how to model hierarchies. New tools are like
that; you surprise yourself when you finally get the feel for them.

There are many different ways to represent trees in SQL and this short
article discusses one of them. This material is taken, slightly
modified, from Chapter 3 of my new book, [Trees & Hierarchies in SQL for
Smarties](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1558609202/qid=1080772873/sr=1-1/ref=sr_1_1/102-7683601-6345721?v=glance&s=books#product-details))
from Morgan-Kaufmann Publishers.

### Path Enumeration Models

One of the properties of trees is that there is one and only one path
from the root to every node in the tree. The path enumeration model
stores that path as a string by concatenating either the edges or the
keys of the nodes in the path. Searches are done with string functions
and predicates on those path strings.

There are two methods for enumerating the paths, edge enumeration and
node enumeration. The node enumeration is the most common, and there is
little difference in the basic string operations on either model.
However, the edge enumeration model has some useful numeric properties.

It is probably a good idea to give the nodes a `CHAR(n)` identifier of a
known size and format to make the path concatenations easier to handle.
The other alternative is to use `VARCHAR(n)` strings, putting a
separator character between each node identifier in the concatenation â€”
a character that does not appear in the identifier itself.

To keep the examples as simple as possible, let's use my five person
`Personnel_OrgChart` table and a `CHAR(1)` identifier column to build a
Path Enumeration model.

    -- path is a reserved word in SQL-99
    -- CHECK() constraint prevents separator in the column.)

    CREATE TABLE Personnel_OrgChart
    (emp_name CHAR(10) NOT NULL,
     emp_id CHAR(1) NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY
            CHECK(REPLACE (emp_id, '/', '') = emp_id)),
     path_string VARCHAR(500) NOT NULL);


    CREATE TABLE OrgChart 
    (emp CHAR(10) NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY, 
      boss CHAR(10) DEFAULT NULL REFERENCES OrgChart(emp), 
      salary DECIMAL(6,2) NOT NULL DEFAULT 100.00);

    OrgChart 
    emp       boss      salary 
    ===========================
    'Albert'  NULL      1000.00
    'Bert'    'Albert'   900.00
    'Chuck'   'Albert'   900.00
    'Donna'   'Chuck'    800.00
    'Eddie'   'Chuck'    700.00
    'Fred'    'Chuck'    600.00

Another way of representing trees is to show them as nested sets. Since
SQL is a set-oriented language, this is a better model than the usual
adjacency-list approach you see in most textbooks. Let us define a
simple Personnel-Orgchart like this. It would look like this as a
directed graph:

            Albert
             /   \
            /     \
        Bert     Chuck 
                /  |  \
               /   |   \
              /    |    \
          Donna  Eddie Fred

    Personnel_OrgChart
     emp_name  emp_id   path_string
    ===============================
    'Albert'   'A'     'A'
    'Bert'     'B'     'AB'
    'Chuck'    'C'     'AC'
    'Donna'    'D'     'ACD'
    'Eddie'    'E'     'ACE'
    'Fred'     'F'     'ACF'

Note that I have not broken the sample table into
`Personnel (emp_id, path_string)` and `OrgChart (emp_id, emp_name)`
tables. This would be a better design, but allow me this bit of
sloppiness to make the code simpler to read.
`REPLACE (<str_exp_1>, <str_exp_2>, <str_exp_3>)` is a common vendor
string function. It searches the first string expression for all
occurrences of the second string expression. If it finds any, it
replaces them with the third string expression. The third string
expression can be the empty string as in the `CHECK ()` constraint just
given.

Another problem is how to prevent cycles in the graph. A cycle would be
represented as a path string in which at least one `emp_id` string
appears twice, such as `ABCA` in my sample table. The following
constraint with a subquery can fix this:

     CHECK (NOT EXISTS
            (SELECT *
               FROM Personnel_OrgChart AS D1,
                    Personnel_OrgChart AS P1
              WHERE CHAR_LENGTH (REPLACE (D1.emp_id, P1.path_string, ''))
                    < (CHAR_LENGTH(P1.path_string)
                       - 1) -- size of one emp_id string
            ))

Another fact about such a tree is that no path can be longer than the
number of nodes in the tree.

    CHECK ((SELECT MAX(CHAR_LENGTH(path_string))
               FROM Personnel_OrgChart AS P1)
             <= (SELECT COUNT(emp_id) * CHAR_LENGTH(emp_id)
                   FROM Personnel_OrgChart AS P2))

This assumes that the `emp_id` has a fixed length and there are no
separators between them in the `path_string`. Unfortunately, the SQL-92
feature of a subquery in a constraint is not widely implemented yet.

### Finding the Depth of the Tree

If you have used a fixed-length `emp_id` string, then the depth is the
length of the path divided by the length of the `emp_id` string,
`CHAR_LENGTH(emp_id)`.

    CHAR_LENGTH(path_string)/ CHAR_LENGTH(emp_id)

I have made it easy to compute by using a single-character `emp_id`
code. This is not usually possible in a real tree with several hundred
nodes.

If you used a varying length `emp_id`, then the depth is:

    CHAR_LENGTH(path_string) - CHAR_LENGTH (REPLACE (path_string, '/', '')) +1

As explained earlier, the `REPLACE()` function is not a Standard SQL
string function, but it is quite common in actual SQL products. This
approach counts the separators.

### Searching for Subordinates

Given a parent, find all of the subtrees under it. The immediate
solution is this:

    SELECT *
       FROM Personnel_OrgChart
      WHERE path_string LIKE '%' || :parent_emp_id || '%';

The problem is that searches with `LIKE` predicates, whose pattern
begins with a `%` wildcard, are slow, because they usually generate a
table scan. Also, note that using `_%` in the front of the `LIKE`
predicate pattern will exclude the root of the subtree from the answer.
Another approach is this query:

    SELECT *
       FROM Personnel_OrgChart
      WHERE path_string LIKE (SELECT path_string FROM Personnel_OrgChart
                        WHERE emp_id = :parent_emp_id) || '%';

The subquery will use the indexing on the `emp_id` column to find the
"front part" of the path string from the root to the given parent.

Traveling down the tree is easy. Instead of the `%` wildcard, use a
string of underscore (`_`) wildcards of the right length. For example,
this will find the immediate children of a given parent `emp_id`:

    SELECT *
       FROM Personnel_OrgChart
      WHERE path_string LIKE (SELECT path_string FROM Personnel_OrgChart
                        WHERE emp_id = :parent_emp_id) ||'_';

Many SQL products have a function that will pad a string with repeated
copies of an input string or return a string of repeated copies of an
input string. For example, SQL Server has a
`REPLICATE (<character exp>, <integer exp>)` and Oracle has `LPAD()` and
`RPAD()`. This can be useful for generating a search pattern of
underscores on the fly.

    SELECT *
       FROM Personnel_OrgChart
      WHERE path_string LIKE (SELECT path_string FROM Personnel_OrgChart
                        WHERE emp_id = :parent_emp_id)
                      || REPLICATE ('_', :n);

To find the immediate subordinates, assuming a numeric path string using
periods, like the structure of a numeric outline:

    SELECT * 
      FROM Personnel_OrgChart
     WHERE path_string LIKE '01.02.01.%'
       AND path_string NOT LIKE '01.02.01.%.%';

The second search condition is there to prevent a table scan and to
restrict the results to the immediate subordinates.

[](<!--CS_NEXT_REF-->)

### Searching for Superiors

Given a node, find all of its superiors. This requires disassembling the
path back into the identifiers that constructed it. We can use a table
of sequential integers to find the required substrings:

    SELECT SUBSTRING (P1.path_string 
                FROM (seq * CHAR_LENGTH(P1.emp_id)) 
                 FOR CHAR_LENGTH(P1.emp_id)) AS emp_id
       FROM Personnel_OrgChart AS P1,
            Sequence AS S1  
      WHERE P1.emp_id = :search_emp_id
        AND S1.seq <= CHAR_LENGTH(path_string)/CHAR_LENGTH(emp_id);

The problem is that this does not tell you the relationships among the
superiors, only who they are. Those relationships are actually easier to
report.

    SELECT P2.*
       FROM Personnel_OrgChart AS P1,
            Personnel_OrgChart AS P2
      WHERE P1.emp_id = :search_emp_id
        AND POSITION (P2.path_string IN P1.path_string) = 1;

### Deleting a Subtree

Given a node, delete the subtree rooted at that node. This can use the
same predicate as for finding the subordinates.

    DELETE FROM Personnel_OrgChart
     WHERE path_string LIKE (SELECT path_string FROM Personnel_OrgChart
                       WHERE emp_id = :dead_guy) || '%';

### Deleting a Single Node

Once more we have to face the problem that removing a non-leaf node from
a tree means that it is no longer a tree. We need to have rules for
changing the structure.

Assuming that we simply move everyone up a level in the tree, we can
first remove that node `emp_id` from the `Personnel_OrgChart` table and
then remove that `emp_id` from the paths of the other nodes.

    BEGIN ATOMIC
    DELETE FROM Personnel_OrgChart
     WHERE emp_id = :dead_guy;
    UPDATE Personnel_OrgChart
       SET path_string = REPLACE (path_string, :dead_guy, '');
    END;

There are other methods of rebuilding the tree structure after deleting
a node: promoting a subordinate based on some criteria to the newly
vacant position or leaving a vacancy (a dummy employee named
`{{vacant}}`) in the organizational chart are options. These options
usually require some combination of node deletions and insertions.

### Inserting a New Node

When inserting a new node, simply concatenate the new `emp_id` to the
end of the path of its parent node.

    INSERT INTO Personnel_OrgChart
    VALUES (:new_guy, :new_emp_id,
            (SELECT path_string 
               FROM Personnel_OrgChart 
              WHERE emp_id = :new_guy_boss)
             || :new_emp_id);

This basic statement can work for insertion of a subtree with some
modification:

    INSERT INTO Personnel_OrgChart
    SELECT N1.emp, N1.emp_id,
            (SELECT path_string 
               FROM Personnel_OrgChart 
              WHERE emp_id = :new_tree_boss)
             || N1.emp_id
      FROM NewTree AS N1;

### Splitting Up a Path String

The path string contains information about the nodes in the path it
represents, so you will often want to split it back into the nodes it
represents. This is easier to do if the path string uses a separator
character, such as a comma or slash. I will use a slash so this will
look like a directory path in UNIX. You will also need a table called
`Sequence` that contains a set of integers from 1 to (*n*).

`CharIndex(<search string>, <target string>, <starting position>)` is a
vendor version of the Standard SQL function
`POSITION(<search string> IN <target string>)`. It begins the search at
a position in the target string, thus when the <*starting position*< =
1, the two are equivalent. One definition is:

    CREATE FUNCTION CharIndex (IN search_str VARCHAR(1000), 
        IN target VARCHAR(1000), IN start_point INTEGER) RETURNS INTEGER 
    RETURN
       (POSITION (search_str 
                  IN SUBSTRING (target FROM start_point)) + start_point -1);

#### Version 1

    SELECT CASE WHEN SUBSTRING('/' || P1.path_string || 
                                          '/' FROM S1.seq FOR 1) = '/'
                 THEN SUBSTRING('/' || P1.path_string || '/' FROM (S1.seq +1) 
                    FOR CharIndex('/', '/' || P1.path_string || '/', S1.seq +1) 
                       - S1.seq - 1)
                 ELSE NULL END AS emp_id
       FROM Sequence AS S1, Personnel_OrgChart AS P1
      WHERE S1.seq BETWEEN 1 AND CHAR_LENGTH('/' || P1.path_string || '/') - 1
        AND SUBSTRING('/' || P1.path_string || '/' FROM S1.seq FOR 1) = '/'

#### Version 2

This uses the same idea, but with two sequence numbers to bracket the
`emp_id` embedded in the path string. It also returns the position of
the subordinate `emp_id` in the path.

    CREATE VIEW Breakdown (emp_id, step_nbr, subordinate_emp_id)
    AS
    SELECT emp_id, 
           COUNT(S2.seq),
           SUBSTRING ('/' || P1.path_string || '/', MAX(S1.seq || 1)
                       FROM (S2.seq - MAX(S1.seq || 1))
      FROM Personnel_OrgChart AS P1, Sequence AS S1, Sequence AS S2
     WHERE SUBSTRING ('/' || P1.path_string || '/', S1.seq, 1) = '/'
       AND SUBSTRING ('/' || P1.path_string || '/', S2.seq, 1) = '/'
       AND S1.seq < S2.seq
       AND S2.seq <= CHAR_LENGTH(P1.path_string) +1
     GROUP BY P1.emp_id, P1.path_string, S2.seq;

The S1 and S2 copies of Sequence help to locate bracketing pairs of
separators. The entire set of substrings located between them is
extracted in one step. The trick is to be sure that the left-hand
separator of the bracketing pair is the closest one to the second
separator. The `step_nbr` column tells you the relative position of the
subordinate employee to the employee in the path.

#### Version 3

This version is the same as above, but more concise and easy to
comprehend.

    SELECT SUBSTRING('/' || P1.path_string || '/' 
                      FROM S1.seq +1
                       FOR CharIndex('/', 
                                     '/' || P1.path_string || '/', 
                                     S1.seq +1)- S1.seq - 1) AS node
       FROM Sequence AS S1, Personnel_OrgChart AS P1
      WHERE SUBSTRING('/' || P1.path_string || '/'
                       FROM S1.seq FOR 1) = '/'
        AND seq < CHAR_LENGTH('/' || P1.path_string || '/');

#### Version 4

Here's another way, using the `LIKE` predicate:

    SELECT SUBSTRING(P1.path_string 
                      FROM seq +1 
                       FOR CharIndex('/', P1.path_string, S1.seq +1) - (S1.seq +1))
       FROM Sequence AS S1
            INNER JOIN 
            (SELECT '/' || path_string || '/' 
               FROM Personnel_OrgChart) AS P1.(path_string)
            ON S1.seq <= CHAR_LENGTH(P1.path_string)
               AND SUBSTRING(P1.path_string 
                             FROM S1.seq 
                              FOR CHAR_LENGTH(P1.path_string)) 
                   LIKE '/_%';

### The Edge Enumeration Model

So far, we have seen the node enumeration version of the path
enumeration model. In the edge enumeration model, the "driving
directions" for following the path from the root to each node are
integers. The path column contains a string of the edges that make up a
path from the root (`Albert`) to each node, numbering them from left to
right at each level in the tree.

    Personnel_OrgChart
    emp_name edge_path  
    ==================
    'Albert'   '1.'
    'Bert'     '1.1.'
    'Chuck'    '1.2.' 
    'Donna'    '1.2.1.' 
    'Eddie'    '1.2.2.' 
    'Fred'     '1.2.3.'

For example, `Donna` is the second child of the first child (`Chuck`) of
the root (`Albert`). This assigns a partial ordering to the nodes of the
trees. The main advantage of this notation is that you do not have to
worry about long strings, but there is no real difference in the
manipulations. The numbering does give an implied ordering to siblings
that might have meaning.

### Summary

Path enumeration models have problems with deeper trees and with trees
that do not have a natural way of naming the nodes or edges. Maintaining
proper constraints can be difficult in actual SQL products because of
the lack of support for Full SQL-92 features.

On the plus side, path enumeration is a very fast and natural technique
for trees without great depth and frequent changes to the structure. If
you perform most of your searches and aggregations from the root down,
it can handle surprisingly wide tree structures.

**

* * * * *

Return to [ONLamp.com](http://www.onlamp.com/).

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.onlamp.com/2004/08/05/hierarchical_sql.html
