The Digital Wallet Revolution
=============================

By EDWARD CASTRONOVA and JOSHUA A.T. FAIRFIELDSEPT. 10, 2014

Inside

Photo

![image](http://static01.nyt.com/images/2014/09/11/opinion/0911OPEDothermeans/0911OPEDothermeans-master675.jpg)

Credit Other Means; Photographs from Getty Images

[Continue reading the main story](#story-continues-1)

[Continue reading the main story](#story-continues-1)

[Continue reading the main story](#story-continues-1) Share This Page

[Continue reading the main story](#story-continues-1)

[Continue reading the main story](#story-continues-1)

THIS week Apple announced two new pieces of hardware, the iPhone 6 and a
“smartwatch.” But as flashy as they are, neither item is as
groundbreaking as a piece of software that will accompany them: a
[digital
wallet](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/10/technology/apples-ambitious-bet-beyond-the-devices.html),
allowing users to eschew cash and credit cards for a quick swipe of
their device at the register.

Apple’s digital wallet, if widely adopted, could usher in a new era of
ease and convenience. But the really exciting part is the fast-emerging
future that it points toward, in which virtual assets of all sorts —
traditional currencies, but also Bitcoin, airline miles, cellphone
minutes — are interchangeable, opening up enormous purchasing power for
consumers and creating tough challenges for governments around the
world.

Moving toward a digital wallet for dollars (or yen, or euros) is only a
marginal step forward; throughout history, money’s value has been
largely virtual anyway — think of stocks, or personal lines of credit.
The real change is how the digital wallet technology facilitates the
parallel emergence of virtual purchasing power, like loyalty points.

We don’t typically think of these as currency, because virtual money has
traditionally been locked down, in the sense that its use was strictly
limited: If you earned points from Amazon, only you could use them, and
you could exchange them for dollars only within the Amazon marketplace.
Meanwhile, up to now, the only currencies you could use everywhere in an
economy were state-issued currencies, like the dollar.

But that distinction is eroding: After all, the value of a currency lies
in what you can buy with it, not in the fact that a government says it’s
worth something. So if I want to buy a widget, and the only thing I can
use to buy it is Widgetcash, then I am willing to trade dollars or euros
or anything else for Widgetcash. When I buy something with Widgetcash,
it doesn’t go through any bank.

That’s why a digital wallet, loaded with your dollars, credit and
loyalty points, is such a revolutionary technology — it makes those
transfers and transactions seamless and safe.

Imagine you want to buy a shirt at Target. Your digital wallet can pay
for it with dollars, your Target points or any other form of purchasing
power that Target accepts. Wave your phone at the cash register, and the
shirt is yours.

That’s the sort of thing that the current generation of digital wallets
already promises; the only obstacle is adoption by retailers. But that
won’t be an obstacle for long. Frictionless exchange is a killer app.
Some companies might lose value in their loyalty programs, but others
will find enormous value in issuing their own currencies for advertising
or data-tracking purposes, or even just because the creation of a
successful virtual currency or digital wallet lets companies make money
by making money. That’s certainly Apple’s bet.

The revolution is what comes next: an exchange that connects and trades
these different stores of value to find the most cost-efficient one to
use, both within your wallet and between wallet users, worldwide. Let’s
say you want to buy an audiobook from Best Buy. It costs $16, or 1,000
My Best Buy points, or M.B.B.P.s. Your wallet contains several hundred
dollars and 200 Best Buy points. The wallet software automatically
determines that, at the current exchange rate between M.B.B.P.s and
dollars, it is better to buy using the points.

[Continue reading the main story](#story-continues-4)

[Continue reading the main story](#story-continues-4)

But then let’s say you only have 50 M.B.B.P.s. The wallet system
searches its clients and finds someone — call her Hannah — with enough
M.B.B.P.s for the transaction. It buys the audiobook with her points and
sends it to you, and sends Hannah dollars from your account.

Following Bitcoin’s protocol, the wallet software broadcasts these
transactions to the network, and every wallet in the world updates the
M.B.B.P.-to-dollar exchange rate.

The idea is that you can buy anything, with anything. The wallet will
find the best deal and execute it. In so doing, it will ignore the
historical and cultural differences between dollars, points, coins and
virtual property. It’s all bits anyway.

This sort of digital wallet raises difficult problems for regulators,
who rely on institutional intermediaries like banks as the point for
monitoring transactions. But a digital wallet can be a phone app; just
like the cash in your pocket, it doesn’t require accounts with any
intermediary. A wallet app can be written by anyone, downloaded by
anyone and secured and maintained by everyone. In this huge river of
money, there is no narrow channel from which the state can divert flow
into its own fields.

Consider the tax implications. If you get caught cheating on your taxes
and flee the country, the government could compel your bank to freeze
your assets and cough up the money. But what if there’s no bank?

One concern that doesn’t apply is transparency. Digital wallets don’t
hide trades or encourage criminal transactions. Using Bitcoin is much
less secret than using hard cash. The government, and anybody else, can
easily see the trades passing through our wallets, just as every trade
in Bitcoin is visible at [blockchain.info](http://blockchain.info). Even
if you try to hide who you are, network or traffic analysis can often
de-anonymize you. The critical point is that, with a digital wallet, a
government or bank can see the trades, but it will be harder to compel
or block them.

As exchange becomes less costly to perform, it becomes more costly to
regulate. That means different things depending on your politics. You
might celebrate the freedom the technology could bring to the 2.5
billion people in the world without adequate access to financial
services, or you might worry about abuse by criminals. One thing that
will not work is pretending that these technologies — and their
revolutionary implications — don’t exist.

[Edward Castronova](http://mypage.iu.edu/~castro/home.html) is a
professor of media at Indiana University and author of “Wildcat
Currency: How the Virtual Money Revolution Is Transforming the Economy.”
[Joshua A.T.
Fairfield](http://law.wlu.edu/faculty/profiledetail.asp?id=242) is a
professor of law at Washington and Lee University.

A version of this op-ed appears in print on September 11, 2014, on page
A27 of the New York edition with the headline: The Digital Wallet
Revolution. [Order
Reprints](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?contentID=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nytimes.com%2F2014%2F09%2F11%2Fopinion%2Fthe-digital-wallet-revolution.html&publisherName=The+New+York+Times&publication=nytimes.com&token=&orderBeanReset=true&postType=&wordCount=967&title=The+Digital+Wallet+Revolution&publicationDate=September+10%2C+2014&author=By%20Edward%20Castronova%20and%20Joshua%20A.t.%20Fairfield)|[Today's
Paper](http://www.nytimes.com/pages/todayspaper/index.html)|[Subscribe](http://www.nytimes.com/subscriptions/Multiproduct/lp839RF.html?campaignId=48JQY)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/11/opinion/the-digital-wallet-revolution.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=0&referrer=
