### Sam Saffron

Programming, Technology and the Art of Hacking

-   Ruby
-   MiniProfiler
-   SQL
-   Dapper
-   Media Browser
-   C\#

-   [Home](/)
-   [About](/about)

[Do you smoke test?](/archive/2013/02/22/do-you-smoke-test)
-----------------------------------------------------------

about 1 year ago

I broke [Discourse](http://www.discourse.org) yesterday.

Not in the "its just a little bit broken sense". Instead, in the
absolutely everything is broken and every page returns a 500 error code,
sense.

We already do so much to ensure Discourse always works, in true [Eric
Ries](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_Ries) lean startup, Rails best
practice way.

We have **1800**
[specs](https://github.com/discourse/discourse/tree/master/spec) that
exercise a huge portion of the Ruby code.

We have 80 or so tests the test some of the JavaScript (we need more,
lots more)

We **constantly deploy** to our test servers as soon as a commit
happens. Only after this succeeds will we allow deploys to production.

Once a deploy to test happens we get a group chat message informing us
it succeeded with a clear link to click (that takes us to our staging
environment).

Nonetheless, somehow I managed to mess it all up and deploy a junk
build.

### What happened?

The Rails asset pipeline is a bit of a Rubik's Cube. For example, if in
your master layout you have `<%= asset_path "my_asset" %>` it may work
fine in your dev and test environments. However, if you forgot to set a
magic switch to pre-compile the asset, well... everything breaks **in
production**. In my case, I had it all mostly wired up and working in
dev, but a missing `.js` extension meant that I just was not close
enough.

I clicked build, everything passed and forgot to check the test site.

This is my fault, its **100%** my fault.

Often when we hit these kind of issues, as developers, we love assigning
blame. Blame points my way ... don't do it again ... move along nothing
more to see.

That is not good enough.

### What is good enough?

I would like to follow a simple practice at Discourse. If you break
production for any reason, we should make sure an automated system
catches that kind of break next time along.

If you break production, the only thing you are allowed to work on
should be the system that stops that kind of break in future.

### What kind of system can avoid a totally broken build from getting out there?

The trivial thing to do is simply make a HTTP request to staging (our
non customer facing production clone) and ensure it comes back with a
200 code. [Trivial to
add](https://github.com/discourse/discourse/blob/master/lib/tasks/smoke_test.rake).

However, that is not really good enough.

I would like to know that the pages are all rendered properly. At least
3 key pages to start off with. The home page, a topic page and a user
page.

What makes Discourse particularly tricky is that it is an
[Ember.js](http://emberjs.com/) app. You only get to see the "real" page
after a pile of JavaScript work happens. Simply downloading the content
and testing it, is not going to cut it.

Back in the old days we would use
[Selenium](http://docs.seleniumhq.org/) for these kind of tests, trouble
is its not really easy to automate and involves a fairly complex setup.

These days people mostly use [PhantomJS](http://phantomjs.org/), a
headless WebKit browser.

Now, if you are planning on using PhantomJS I would strongly recommend
using a framework like [CasperJS](http://casperjs.org/) to lean on. It
does a lot of the messy work for you. For my initial humble test I
decided to write it all by hand. There were quite a few reasons.

I wanted to know how the underlying APIs work. I needed a bunch of
special hacks to get it to test in a particular way with special magic
delays. I did not want to bring in another complex install process in to
the open source project.

I ended up with [this
test](https://github.com/discourse/discourse/blob/master/spec/phantom_js/smoke_test.js):

    /*global phantom:true */

    console.log('Starting Smoke Test');
    var system = require('system');

    if(system.args.length !== 2) {
      console.log("expecting phantomjs {smoke_test.js} {base_url}");
      phantom.exit(1);
    }

    var page = require('webpage').create();

    page.waitFor = function(desc, fn, timeout, after) {
      var check,start;

      start = +new Date();
      check = function() {
        var r;

        try {
          r = page.evaluate(fn);
        } 
        catch(err) {
          // next time
        }

        var diff = (+new Date()) - start;

        if(r) {
          console.log("PASSED: " + desc + " " + diff + "ms" );
          after(true);
        } else {
          if(diff > timeout) {
            console.log("FAILED: " + desc + " " + diff + "ms");
            after(false);
          } else {
            setTimeout(check, 50);
          }
        }
      };

      check();
    };


    var actions = [];

    var test = function(desc, fn) {
      actions.push({test: fn, desc: desc});
    };

    var navigate = function(desc, fn) {
      actions.push({navigate: fn, desc: desc});
    };

    var run = function(){
      var allPassed = true;
      var done = function() {
        if(allPassed) {
          console.log("ALL PASSED");
        } else {
          console.log("SMOKE TEST FAILED");
        }
        phantom.exit();
      };

      var performNextAction = function(){
        if(actions.length === 0) {
          done();
        }
        else{
          var action = actions[0];
          actions = actions.splice(1);
          if(action.test) {
            page.waitFor(action.desc, action.test, 10000, function(success){
              allPassed = allPassed && success;
              performNextAction();
            });
          } 
          else if(action.navigate) {
            console.log("NAVIGATE: " + action.desc);
            page.evaluate(action.navigate);
            performNextAction();
          }
        }
      };

      performNextAction();
    };

    page.runTests = function(){

      test("more than one topic shows up", function() {
        return jQuery('#topic-list tbody tr').length > 0;
      });

      test("expect a log in button", function(){
        return jQuery('.current-username .btn').text() === 'Log In';
      });

      navigate("navigate to first topic", function(){
        Em.run.later(function(){
          jQuery('.main-link a:first').click();
        }, 500);
      });

      test("at least one post body", function(){
        return jQuery('.topic-post').length > 0;
      });

      navigate("navigate to first user", function(){
        // for whatever reason the clicks do not respond at the beginning
        Em.run.later(function(){
          jQuery('.topic-meta-data a:first').focus().click();
        },500);
      });

      test("has about me section",function(){
        return jQuery('.about-me').length === 1;
      });

      run();
    };

    page.open(system.args[1], function (status) {
        console.log("Opened " + system.args[1]);
        page.runTests();
    });

Now... after we deploy staging we run
`rake smoke:test URL=http://staging.server` and get a result.

Amazingly, less than a day after I wrote it, it already caught another
junk build.

This is a start, I imagine that in a few months we will have a much more
extensive smoke test process.

That said, if you do not have any kind of smoke test process I would
strongly recommend exploring [PhantomJS](http://phantomjs.org/). Getting
something basic up is a matter of hours.

Posted by: Sam [Permalink](/archive/2013/02/22/do-you-smoke-test) |
[Comments (17)](/archive/2013/02/22/do-you-smoke-test#comments)

Comments
--------

[Michael\_Sarchet](michaelsarchet.com) about 1 year ago

![Michael\_Sarchet](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/4136f0704f9ea2858e6efca1ac4961b8.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

Sam,

Thanks for the post. The links to phantom and casper are exactly what I
have been looking for to build some automated testing for a very
knockout heavy application I wrote.

[Ryan\_Williams](http://www.ryan-williams.net) about 1 year ago

![Ryan\_Williams](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/f81281c11185cb99e7b782c17677373c.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

There was a company here in Portland, BrowserMob, that did automated
Selenium testing, it was acquired, looks like the service is still
available.

[http://www.neustar.biz/enterprise/web-performance/what-is-website-monitoring](http://www.neustar.biz/enterprise/web-performance/what-is-website-monitoring)

Doesn’t necessarily help for staging if it’s behind a firewall, but it’s
an option anyway for production apps that don’t render “real” pages via
straight http, as you say.

Alexander\_Overvoorde about 1 year ago

![Alexander\_Overvoorde](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/f90984ad0b6147f68c5044f4a12252b2.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

I’m not familiar with these JavaScript frameworks, but using tests to
solve this seems like a massive hack. Isn’t the point of a testing
environment to be as close to production as possible to find exactly
these problems? Production deployment sounds flawed if you need tests to
check for missing files and incorrect extensions. These developer
mistakes should be causing problems in testing already, making these
additional tests seem like a massive hack.

[Sam Saffron](http://samsaffron.com) about 1 year ago

![Sam
Saffron](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/3dcae8378d46c244172a115c28ca49ce.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

I think my wording was a bit unclear, staging is a test production clone

Gerart about 1 year ago

![Gerart](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/c271d79612ae9df82de811e8b554a48f.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

you should have a look at [http://casperjs.org](http://casperjs.org)

[Sam Saffron](http://samsaffron.com) about 1 year ago

![Sam
Saffron](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/3dcae8378d46c244172a115c28ca49ce.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

you do realise I linked to it
![smile](http://discuss.samsaffron.com/plugins/emoji/images/smile.png ":smile:")

Christian about 1 year ago

![Christian](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/57646c20d2a5fc8545fb99d539c47dc3.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

What about using Selenium IDE to record the tests, then export them as
RSpec or Unit tests and run them in an automated way from then on? That
doesn’t require more setup than installing Phantom, Casper and writing
the test code by hand…

Luis about 1 year ago

![Luis](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/ecee72f5fc3970dae9edf5525a9074f9.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

Have you tried capybara using poltergeist as the web driver and
phantomjs with that. It lets you write your front end spec test in ruby
and is very simple to use. It works wonders with our team. Also as part
of a deploy script we do a sanity test to check that the deploy pushed
something that works. If the sanity check fails you rollback
automatically

[Sam Saffron](http://samsaffron.com) about 1 year ago

![Sam
Saffron](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/3dcae8378d46c244172a115c28ca49ce.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

no, have not, will give capybara a shot

Harri\_Paavola about 1 year ago

![Harri\_Paavola](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/101aef35140f522ba2ea656a780d79cd.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

Since PhantomJS come with webdriver support, I would go with Selenium2
Library for Robot Framework. This way your tests will be much more
clearer, almost plain English. So the first test would be like

Page Should Contain Element css=\#topic-list tbody tr

[Sam Saffron](http://samsaffron.com) about 1 year ago

![Sam
Saffron](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/3dcae8378d46c244172a115c28ca49ce.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

interesting, will have a look at it

Ross\_Patterson about 1 year ago

![Ross\_Patterson](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/7498671672a0de32f100047527a4cb7c.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

Check out GhostDriver
([http://blog.ivandemarino.me/2012/12/04/Finally-GhostDriver-1-0-0](http://blog.ivandemarino.me/2012/12/04/Finally-GhostDriver-1-0-0)),
the PhantomJS implementation of the Selenium/WebDriver API. Really
simple – 34 lines of PhantomJS JavaScript to test the Google search
page, comments included.

Tmk85 about 1 year ago

![Tmk85](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/9ad515943133613f6ba255840a1884d3.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

I recommend using SauceLabs. They have a great variety of browsers and
operating systems. You don’t have to worry about maintaining and
configurating selenium servers yourself. Well worth the price.

[Alfasin](http://alfasin.com) about 1 year ago

![Alfasin](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/6dd60e8de7b606e5e39919e5869eff6e.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

I know it’s a matter of “self preference” but I would rather
initializing var allPassed to “false”. Second, I have two “stupid”
questions\
1. since the product is written in ruby (which I’m not familiar with) –
why not write the tests in ruby as well ?\
2. I have little experience with selenium, but it sounds ideal for such
tests – why don’t you want to use it besides the fact that it’s “old”
(which I call “mature”
![wink](http://discuss.samsaffron.com/plugins/emoji/images/wink.png ":wink:")
?

[Sam Saffron](http://samsaffron.com) about 1 year ago

![Sam
Saffron](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/3dcae8378d46c244172a115c28ca49ce.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

Getting selenium headless is totally doable, just tricky
[http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7568899/does-selenium-support-headless-browser-testing](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7568899/does-selenium-support-headless-browser-testing)
, phantom is easier to get going and less fragile cause its driving its
own webkit

capybara is an option in Ruby, however we are a heavily mixed platform,
a very large amount of Discourse is JavaScript including some server
side components

[Eslam\_El\_Husseiny](http://eslamelhusseiny.wordpress.com/) about 1
year ago

![Eslam\_El\_Husseiny](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/e93dc0d023aeb9dc686653430acbf180.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

as i understand you are smoke testing from development prospective which
is cool, but i’m trying to figure out if smoke testing applies also on
configuration management i.e. if you are using infrastructure as a code
aspect e.g. puppet framework in deployment, can i smoke test deployment
?

[Sam Saffron](http://samsaffron.com) 6 months ago

![Sam
Saffron](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/3dcae8378d46c244172a115c28ca49ce.png?s=60&r=pg&d=identicon)

![image](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/e93dc0d023aeb9dc686653430acbf180.png?s=40&r=pg&d=identicon)Eslam\_El\_Hussei
said:

> can i smoke test deployment ?

The only place we use this technique is smoke testing production data.
During our jenkins build we clone the production environment and test
it, before proceeding with the deployment into staging.

* * * * *

Leave a Comment

comments powered by [Discourse](http://discuss.samsaffron.com)

[![profile for Sam Saffron on Stack Exchange, a network of free,
community-driven Q&A
sites](http://stackexchange.com/users/flair/9321.png "profile for Sam Saffron on Stack Exchange, a network of free, community-driven Q&A sites")](http://stackexchange.com/users/9321)

### Stack Overflow answers

-   [Using SSH keys inside docker
    container](http://stackoverflow.com/q/20170516/17174) 5mon ago
-   [Ruby Garbage Collection Heap Slot
    size](http://stackoverflow.com/q/18647025/17174) 7mon ago
-   [Efficient Ruby LRU
    cache](http://stackoverflow.com/q/16161783/17174) 12mon ago
-   [AOP for MVC Mini
    Profiler](http://stackoverflow.com/q/14096794/17174) \> 1y ago
-   [MiniProfiler Ruby: Getting a better breakdown for non-SQL
    calls](http://stackoverflow.com/q/13907519/17174) \> 1y ago
-   [more
    answers](http://stackoverflow.com/users/17174/sam-saffron#anpage_1-ansort_recent)

### Twitter updates

-   This iTunes phishing attempt is timed perfectly and sneaks through
    [@gmail](https://twitter.com/gmail), scary stuff.
    [imgur.com/E8WJCW2](http://imgur.com/E8WJCW2) [17h
    ago](http://twitter.com/samsaffron/statuses/454400602550697984)
-   "Ruby 2.1 Garbage Collection: ready for production":
    [samsaffron.com/archive/2014/0…](http://samsaffron.com/archive/2014/04/08/ruby-2-1-garbage-collection-ready-for-production)
    [3d ago](http://twitter.com/samsaffron/statuses/453410157368594432)
-   Hosting on Linux? stop what you are doing and check if you are
    vulnerable to Heartbleed
    [filippo.io/Heartbleed](http://filippo.io/Heartbleed) , get openssl
    patched [4d
    ago](http://twitter.com/samsaffron/statuses/453388715432222720)
-   Super impressed with [@discourse](https://twitter.com/discourse)
    preview sync by Velesin,
    [meta.discourse.org/t/syncing-the-…](https://meta.discourse.org/t/syncing-the-editor-viewport-scroll/13249/33?u=sam)
    and
    [github.com/discourse/disc…](https://github.com/discourse/discourse/pull/2100)
    [11d ago](http://twitter.com/samsaffron/statuses/450790852013461504)
-   Blogs without comments enrage me,
    [news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7488233](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7488233)
    [14d ago](http://twitter.com/samsaffron/statuses/449646502067990528)
-   Awesome [@discourse](https://twitter.com/discourse) plugin idea,
    secure encrypted conversations powered by the awesome
    [keybase.io](https://keybase.io/) [15d
    ago](http://twitter.com/samsaffron/statuses/449056029485981696)
-   [@samsaffron](http://twitter.com/#!/samsaffron)

### About me

I am a co-founder of [Discourse](http://www.discourse.org). I live in
sunny Sydney. I love writing about performance, Ruby, Mini Profiler and
technology related topics.

syndication: [rss](/posts.rss) [atom](/posts.atom)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://samsaffron.com/archive/2013/02/22/do-you-smoke-test
