[Oto Brglez](/) [Home](/)

Simple recommendation system written in Ruby
============================================

![image](/images/008-recommend-ruby.jpg)

23 Mar 2014 / ruby

I'm looking for new job; so yesterday I went through my old Rails
projects, trying to describe them for my updated CV. I found interesting
old project where I wrote recommendation system. Nothing fancy, just
simple tag based recommendation for blog articles. I decided to extract
some of the code and blog about it.

Algorithm used for recommendation is based on [Jaccard
Index](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaccard_index) and is also known as
the Jaccard similarity coefficient. Jaccard Index was invented by botany
professor [Paul Jaccard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Jaccard) and
is basically a number that represents similarity and diversity of sample
sets.

How it works?
-------------

Take current item (blog post for example), and its properties that
describe it the best (tags, categories or words). Then you take every
other item and you calculate `division` of `intersection` and `union`.
Mathematical can this be represented with following equation.

![Jaccard Index - Wikipedia -
Similarity](http://upload.wikimedia.org/math/1/8/6/186c7f4e83da32e889d606140fae25a0.png)

Equation will give you number between 0 and 1. You can also easily
calculate dissimilarity between items - represented with next equation.

![Jaccard Index - Wikipedia -
Dissimilarity](http://upload.wikimedia.org/math/0/2/9/02906c47e0a08707ad6e35a6c34a43b4.png)

Example implementation with Ruby
--------------------------------

I'll be recommending books based on words in titles. So simple `Book`
class will do the job just fine.

    class Book < Struct.new(:title)

      # Array of unique words longer than 2 characters.
      # Could also be array of tags or categories.
      def words
        @words ||= self.title.gsub(/[a-zA-Z]{3,}/).map(&:downcase).uniq.sort
      end

    end

`BookRecommender` class is initialized using current book and array of
books. The method `recommendations` will loop over array and set
`jaccard_index` for each item; then items will be sorted accordingly.

    class BookRecommender

      def initialize book, books
        @book, @books = book, books
      end

      def recommendations

        # Map jaccard_index to each item and sort array
        @books.map! do |this_book|

          # We can define jaccard_index getter in runtime as singleton...
          this_book.define_singleton_method(:jaccard_index) do
            @jaccard_index
          end

          # also setter
          this_book.define_singleton_method("jaccard_index=") do |index|
            @jaccard_index = index || 0.0
          end

          # Calculate intersection between sets
          intersection = (@book.words & this_book.words).size
          # ... and union
          union = (@book.words | this_book.words).size

          # Assign the division and rescue if division is not possible with 0
          this_book.jaccard_index = (intersection.to_f / union.to_f) rescue 0.0

          this_book

          # Sort items
        end.sort_by { |book| 1 - book.jaccard_index }

      end

    end

For demonstration purposes...

    # ...
    # Read data and define array of books
    BOOKS = DATA.read.split("\n").map { |l| Book.new(l) }

    # Define current book
    current_book = Book.new("Ruby programming language")

    # Do recommendation...
    books = BookRecommender.new(current_book, BOOKS).recommendations

    books.each do |book|
      puts "#{book.title} (#{'%.2f' % book.jaccard_index})"
    end

    __END__
    Finding the best language for the job
    Could Ruby save the day
    Python will rock your world
    Is Ruby better than Python
    Programming in Ruby is fun
    Python to the moon
    Programming languages of the future

Sample output for title "Ruby programming language" with Jaccard index
visible on the right side.

    Programming in Ruby is fun (0.50)
    Programming languages of the future (0.17)
    Is Ruby better than Python (0.17)
    Could Ruby save the day (0.14)
    Finding the best language for the job (0.12)
    Python to the moon (0.00)
    Python will rock your world (0.00)

Conclusion
----------

This is purely Ruby based solution - [source code can be found on my
gist](https://gist.github.com/otobrglez/9738998). I've also written
[PostgreSQL versions](https://gist.github.com/otobrglez/1078953) that
uses tags. Please have in mind that if the sets are bigger the code will
get slower; so don't do recommendations each time you "open" item.
Define background service that will calculate recommendations in
background!

Hope that you can use this in your projects and please - give me some
feedback. Thanks! :)

\

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments.

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

Oto Brglez - Ruby / JavaScript hacker and Web architect.

[github.com/otobrglez](https://github.com/otobrglez)\
 [@otobrglez](https://twitter.com/otobrglez)\
 [LinkedIn Profile](http://www.linkedin.com/in/otobrglez)\


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://otobrglez.opalab.com/ruby/2014/03/23/simple-ruby-recommendation-system.html
