[Charlie's Diary](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/)

Being the blog of Charles Stross, author, and occasional guests ...

[ [Home](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/) ] [
[FAQ](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/fiction/faq.html) ] [
[Contact me](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/who_am_i/foo.cgi) ] [
[Older stuff](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/old/index.html) ]

Back to: [This explains
everything](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/this-explains-everything.html)
| Forward to: [Boskone
50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/boskone-50.html)

Political failure modes and the beige dictatorship

### By [Charlie Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

Random meta-political noodling here ...

For a while I've had the unwelcome feeling that [we're living under
occupation by Martian
invaders](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2010/12/invaders-from-mars.html).
(Not just here in the UK, but everyone, everywhere on the planet.)
Something has gone *wrong* with our political processes, on a global
scale. But what? It's obviously subtle — we haven't been on the
receiving end of a bunch of jack-booted fascists or their communist
equivalents organizing putsches. But we've somehow slid into a
developed-world global-scale quasi-police state, with drone strikes and
extraordinary rendition and unquestioned but insane austerity policies
being rammed down our throats, government services being outsourced,
peaceful protesters being pepper-sprayed, tased, or even killed, police
spying on political dissidents becoming normal, and so on. *What's
happening?*

Here's a hypothesis: Representative democracy is what's happening.
Unfortunately, democracy is broken. There's a hidden failure mode, we've
landed in it, and we probably won't be able to vote ourselves out of it.

Representative democratic government is theoretically supposed to
deliver certain benefits:

-   Firstly, it legitimizes principled, peaceful opposition within the
    constitutional framework; we have multiple parties, and the party in
    power doesn't simply round up the opposition and have them thrown in
    a GULAG. They concede that the opposition may disagree with the
    party in power on precisely *how* the state must operate, but agree
    that it *should* operate: the difference is a civilized argument
    over details, not a knife-fight with totalitarian enemies.

-   Secondly, it provides for an organized, peaceful succession
    mechanism. When a governing faction becomes unpopular, it can be
    voted out of office, and will go peacefully, knowing that eventually
    their successors will become unpopular in turn, and there'll be
    another chance to take a bite of the apple. (Totalitarian
    governments tend to hang on until people start shooting at them,
    with a variety results we've recently had a refresher course in —
    Libya, Syria, Egypt, Iran.)

But. *But*.

What if the channels through which concerned people of goodwill who want
to make things better enter the political process and run for election
are fundamentally flawed?

Our *representative* systems almost all run on a party system; even pure
PR systems like that of Israel rely on a party list. (I could take out
Israeli citizenship and run for the Knesset, but I'd be running as "the
Charlie Stross Party", not as myself: if I was a runaway success I'd
need to find some extra representatives to tag along on my coat-tails.)
Parties are bureaucratic institutions with the usual power dynamic of
self-preservation, as per [Michels's iron law of
oligarchy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron_law_of_oligarchy): the
purpose of the organization is to (a) continue to exist, and (b) to gain
and hold power. We can see this in Scotland with the SNP (Scottish
National Party) — originally founded with the goal of obtaining
independence for Scotland and then disbanding, the disbanding bit is now
nowhere to be seen in their constitution.

Per Michels, political parties have an unspoken survival drive. And they
act as filters on the pool of available candidates. You can't easily run
for election — especially at national level — unless you get a party's
support, with the activists and election agents and assistance and
funding that goes with it. (Or you can, but you then have to build your
own machinery.) Existing incumbent representatives have an incentive to
weed out potential candidates who are loose cannons and might jeopardize
their ability to win re-election and maintain a career. Parties
therefore tend to be self-stabilizing.

A secondary issue is that professionals will cream amateurs in any
competition held on a level playing field. And this is true of politics
as much as any other field of human competition. The US House of
Representatives is overwhelmingly dominated by folks with law degrees
(and this is not wholly inappropriate, given they're in the job of
making laws). The UK's Parliament is slightly less narrowly
circumscribed, but nevertheless there's a career path right to the top
in British politics, and it's visible in all the main parties: you go to
a private school then Oxford or Cambridge, participate in student
politics (if you're on the left) or debating societies (if you're on the
right), take a post as researcher or assistant for an MP or (less
commonly) run for a local council office, then run for parliament. There
are plenty of people in every democratic constitutional system who have
never held a job outside of politics — and why should they? Such a
diversion would be a waste of time and energy if your goal is to make a
difference on the national stage.

The emergence of a class of political apparatchik in our democracies is
almost inevitable. I was particularly struck by this at the CREATe
conference, which was launched by a cookie-cutter junior minister from
Westminster: aged 33, worked in politics since leaving university,
married to another MP, clearly focused on a political career path. She
was a liberal democrat, but from her demeanour, speech, and behaviour
there was nothing to distinguish her from a conservative, labour, or
other front-rank party MP. The senior minister from Holyrood was a
little bit less plasticky, slightly more authentic — he had a Glaswegian
accent! And was a member of the SNP! — but he was still one of a kind: a
neatly-coiffured representative of the administrative senior management
class, who could have passed for a CEO or senior bank manager.

So, here's my hypothesis:

-   Institutional survival pressure within organizations — namely
    political parties — causes them to systematically ignore or repel
    candidates for political office who are disinclined to support the
    status quo or who don't conform to the dominant paradigm in the
    practice of politics.

-   The status quo has emerged by consensus between politicians of
    opposite parties, who have converged on a set of policies that they
    deem least likely to lose them an election — whether by generating
    media hostility, corporate/business sector hostility, or by
    provoking public hostility. In other words, the status quo isn't an
    explicit ideology, it's the combined set of policies that were
    historically least likely to rock the boat (for such boat-rocking is
    evaluated in Bayesian terms — "did this policy get some poor bastard
    kicked in the nuts at the last election? If so, it's off the
    table").

-   The news cycle is dominated by large media organizations and the
    interests of the corporate sector. While moral panics serve a useful
    function in alienating or enraging the public against a
    representative or party who have become inconveniently
    uncooperative, for the most part a climate of apathetic
    disengagement is preferred — why get involved when trustworthy,
    reassuringly beige nobodies can do a safe job of looking after us?

-   The range of choices available at the democratic buffet table have
    therefore narrowed until they're indistinguishable. ("You can have
    Chicken Kiev, Chicken Chasseur, or Chicken Korma." "But I'm vegan!")
    Indeed, we have about as much choice as citizens in any one-party
    state used to have.

-   Protests against the range of choices available have become
    conflated with protests against the constitutional framework, i.e.
    dissent has been perceived as subversion/treason.

-   Occasionally cultural shifts take place: over decades, they
    sometimes reach a level of popular consensus that, when not opposed
    by corporate stakeholders, leads to actual change. Marriage equality
    is a fundamentally socially conservative issue, but reflects the
    long-term reduction in prejudice against non-heteronormative groups.
    Nobody (except moral entrepreneurs attempting to build a platform
    among various reactionary religious institutions) stands to lose
    money or status by permitting it, so it gets the nod.
    Decriminalization of drug use, on the other hand, would be
    catastrophic for the budget of policing organizations and the
    prison-industrial complex: it might be popular in some circles, but
    the people who count the money won't let it pass without a fight.

Overall, the nature of the problem seems to be that our representative
democratic institutions have been captured by meta-institutions that
implement the iron law of oligarchy by systematically reducing the risk
of change. They have done so by converging on a common set of policies
that do not serve the public interest, but minimize the risk of the
parties losing the corporate funding they require in order to achieve
re-election. And in so doing, they have broken the "peaceful succession
when enough people get pissed off" mechanism that prevents
[revolutions](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/feb/05/arab-spring-global-revolution?INTCMP=SRCH).
If we're lucky, emergent radical parties will break the gridlock (here
in the UK that would be the SNP in Scotland, possibly UKIP in England:
in the USA it might be the new party that emerges if the rupture between
the Republican realists like Karl Rove and the Tea Party radicals
finally goes nuclear), but within a political generation (two election
terms) it'll be back to oligarchy as usual.

So the future isn't a boot stamping on a human face, forever. It's a
person in a beige business outfit advocating beige policies that nobody
wants (but nobody can quite articulate a coherent alternative to) with a
false mandate obtained by performing rituals of representative democracy
that offer as much actual choice as a Stalinist one-party state. And
resistance is futile, because if you succeed in overthrowing the beige
dictatorship, you will become that which you opposed.

Thoughts?

Posted by [Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
at 10:20 on February 8, 2013 | [Comments
(358)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comments "358 Comments")

358 Comments
------------

[![bencurthoys](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1943)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
bencurthoys | [February 8, 2013
11:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154932)

**1:**

There's an interesting crossover with
[http://www.aeonmagazine.com/living-together/peter-turchin-wealth-poverty/](http://www.aeonmagazine.com/living-together/peter-turchin-wealth-poverty/)

I don't think the current state is forever; it's not as stable as it
seems. The increasing inequality (historically) has always been
corrected by a swing back, because the powerful recognise that it's
necessary to avoid violent revolution.

\
 Personally speaking, I'm planning to get rich, and then change things.

[![Orin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1944)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Orin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1944)
| [February 8, 2013
11:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154934)

**2:**

Suspect we need a great definition of what a working representative
government looks like and how it functions before we can come up with a
system that gives us one.\

[![Princejvstin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1602)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Princejvstin](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1602)
| [February 8, 2013
11:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154937)

**3:**

Nothing lasts forever, not even this beige dictatorship.

However, this in the short run is probably going to be only long enough
until something upsets the applecart. My money is on a catastrophic
global warming-oriented event.

The reset buttons on this failure mode are firmly on the outside of the
box we are in.

[![woesinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1945)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
woesinger | [February 8, 2013
11:15](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154939)

**4:**

For reference, Charlie, would you like to describe what the non-failure
mode of representative democracy looks like on a day-to-day basis?

[![Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)
| [February 8, 2013
11:15](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154940)

**5:**

Simple solution:

Pick eligble citizens to parliament using a scientifically backed
randomized method.

You will get a parliament which truly reflects, in a statistical meaning
of the word, the electorate, and you dispense with the "beauty-contest"
aspect of modern democracy.

Sure, there are downsides, but I have a hard time seeing them be worse
than the current medio-cleptocracy.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
woesinger](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154939)
| [February 8, 2013
11:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154942)

**6:**

*For reference, Charlie, would you like to describe what the non-failure
mode of representative democracy looks like on a day-to-day basis?*

That's a *hard* problem to answer.

The solution may well not be representative democracy -- at least, not
as we know it -- any more than the solution to the problems besetting
monarchical system in Europe circa 1848 was a better monarchy.

[![chinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1947)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[chinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1947)
| [February 8, 2013
11:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154943)

**7:**

\>The news cycle is dominated by large media organizations and the
interests of the corporate sector.

This is the most vulnerable part of this trend - various Internet based
technology continue to erode this monopoly by reducing the power of
gatekeepers. And this is where entrenched interest's backlash would be
in the nearest future. And this is where real battle should be fought.

[![Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)
| [February 8, 2013
11:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154944)

**8:**

@7:

Actually, if you look at how Huffington post evolved from a challenger
of the traditional media, into a copycat of them, you will see that once
your incentive becomes "attracting eyeballs" it all becomes cute
kittens, fake outrage and diets...

There is very little qualititative difference between Huffington Post
and The Sun today.

[![chinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1947)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[chinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1947)
| [February 8, 2013
11:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154946)

**9:**

@8:

Yes. And that's what will kill HuffPost. Any specific media outlet will
have limited time before succumbing into beige. But unless you can
prevent formation of the new ones - it will just be replaced by
incumbent. Who will also fall into beige after some evolution

[![Joris
M](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1948)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Joris
M](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1948) |
[February 8, 2013
11:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154948)

**10:**

I think you are on to something here.

Even in the more chaotic setting of the Dutch system (proportional
representation, based on party lists) this problem occurs. The
traditional parties with strong organizations and lots of experience
occupy the centre of politics and decide policy. The only real way for
other groups to come in is from an extreme position.

In theory that means that we do have a mechanism for change present, but
practice teaches that the only groups that can enter the system
successfully are those that copy the structure and organization of the
traditional parties.

Of course we do have a slow shift throughout the decades, but that is
probably similar to how the large UK and US parties slowly shift, only
more clearly labelled. \

[![woesinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1945)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
woesinger replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154942)
| [February 8, 2013
11:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154951)

**11:**

Well - you're proposing an (interesting!)answer to a slightly different
question - what is better than representative democracy.

I'm asking what a functioning representative democracy would look like.

And, I suppose, I'm getting at the point that perhaps the beigemony we
see is a feature not a bug.

Could it be that, given human tendencies towards clannishness,
semi-hereditary cliques, and corruption, that the least worst state is
an ongoing "management" of the beige though periodic and neverending
rounds of reform and - if things get really bad - revolution? With the
understanding that you're never going to reach the utopia your reform or
revolution seeks, and that the best you'll ever do is to keep the shade
of beige tolerably benign to a relatively large section of the populace.

[![mas.gramondou](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1949)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
mas.gramondou | [February 8, 2013
11:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154952)

**12:**

What you don't mention, but which is an obvious corollory to your
general rule of Beige, is that no politician who supports smaller
government really stands a chance of getting elected. And if they do by
some chance get elected they'll never get a chance to actually implement
those policies because they are directly threatening all those rent
seekers sucking from the government teat.\

[![paul.warren.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1464)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://paul.warren.myopenid.com/)
[paul.warren.myopenid.com](http://paul.warren.myopenid.com/ "http://paul.warren.myopenid.com/")
| [February 8, 2013
11:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154953)

**13:**

That's articulated my thoughts quite accurate Charlie! I don't have the
imagination to think up what might come next, or even, what I can do
about the shit situation we're in.

In Aus, we have a choice between a quite obviously crazy right wing
Christian who wants to tear up the best infrastructure project we've had
since the Snowy Scheme, and a reasonable well adjusted, annoyingly
voiced, relatively normal, not quite so right wing Prime Minister who
sends children to concentration camps because they and their families
had the audacity to buy passage on a boat.

All presided over by two parties, almost indistinguishable in policy who
play politics instead of governing, and are reported on by Mr Murdoch
and Mr Packer.

I like the idea of a Demarchy facilitated by ubiquitous technology and
useful public key encryption (GPG signed and encrypted ballots for
example), doing away with the two houses of parliament, and retaining
the Governer General as a head of state, at least unless the Monarch
visits :)

No idea where to start for implementing that in the world I live in
though.

[![Jan
Gutter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1345)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jan
Gutter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1345)
| [February 8, 2013
11:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154954)

**14:**

Two interesting observations here:

If you want to see if this failure mode is self-sustaining, you should
be able to observe it much quicker in South Africa. We seem to have
transitioned into it immediately. It's amazing how \*quick\* the
transition happened between "revolutionary force" and "ruling class".
The ruling party is promoting an official secrets act to "bring us more
into International" line where whistleblowers are basically given
mandatory sentences.

I seem to recall an ignobel prize given to a set of researchers that
proved that promoting people randomly in an organization leads to better
performance. I think they applied the same logic to politics and found
out that people were much happier if a sizeable percentage of the public
servants (heh, heh) were "drafted" by a random process.

Maybe, introducing chaos into the system will prevent stagnation in
local maxima. Although, introducing that type of chaos would be akin to
a complete shift in power, which might never happen.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
| [February 8, 2013
11:39](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154958)

**15:**

Yeah, meet the new boss. Same as the old boss.

Special interest groups (some of which constitute the real Big Brother)
learn to game the system faster than the system develops an immune
system to them. The more complex the system, the more it favors special
interest groups with expert agents who know how to use it. Simpler
systems put everyone on an equal footing. Given what has been learned so
far about how all this happens, it would be possible to design a form of
democracy that had better resistance, but it's gone too far and the
existing system won't ever make any move in that direction. The last
gasp in the USA was the movement to restrict congressional term limits
back in the early '90s. It gave Newt Gingrich control of congress and
then promptly died.

Since anyone who gets in power will use it to alter the system to ensure
continued power, it's amazing that any semblance of democracy has lasted
as long as it has--probably surviving as cover because "they" know they
own it anyway and why not make it look good. If serious reform loomed
that velvet over the iron fist might vanish. The best we can hope for is
noblesse oblige and meritocracy. And gin.

"causes them to systematically ignore ...candidates ...who don't conform
to the dominant paradigm " \
 You have to work with the existing system or you won't get anything
done. It would be foolish for a party to waste energy on someone who
will be ineffective.

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
| [February 8, 2013
11:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154959)

**16:**

There are also factors exogenous to the country. I see two.

One is the Martian-like international corporations; this is what you
hear when somebody proposes to raise taxes for the 0.01% -- the
corporations will simply move their head office to Switzerland or some
other fiscal haven, followed by a cortege of upper-class twats.

The other is the more or less direct and brutal meddling of the
nation-state in the sphere of influence of which the country lies. A
good example of this is what happened to the Australian Prime minister
who'd stood up to the USA, and swiftly got deposed by a palace coup lead
by someone from the same left-wing party, but who happens to have
glowing reviews in the US embassy cables. You can iterate this all over
the world, and sometimes down several recursions (for instance, France
is a US protectorate, and behaves in the same way in its own sphere of
influence).

My faith goes in institutions that are transversal to this state of
things, like the United Nations, the European Union, and some NGOs. They
are not enough to carry the brunt of society, but thay might help
shaking the conventional political system enough for the crassestly
rotten fruits to fall.\

[![woesinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1945)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
woesinger | [February 8, 2013
11:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154960)

**17:**

And one last post - on the question of better systems of governance -
what would a technologically-enabled quorum sensing system for humans
look like on the scale of a nation?

What bits of the human condition would you need to pave over and route
around to make it work? What are the pitfalls? How would the system
break or be exploited by those seeking power? Would the end-result be
worthwhile? Would the end result be a society we'd even recognise as
human any more?

[![Jan
Gutter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1345)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jan
Gutter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1345)
| [February 8, 2013
11:48](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154961)

**18:**

Oh yeah, I completely forgot. Douglas Adams knew about this ALL ALONG:
[http://wso.williams.edu/\~rcarson/lizards.html](http://wso.williams.edu/~rcarson/lizards.html)

"Because if they didn't vote for a lizard," said Ford, "the wrong lizard
might get in. Got any gin?"

All presidents eventually tend to be Zaphod Beeblebrox.

[![Bellinghman](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-989-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=989)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Bellinghman](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=989)
| [February 8, 2013
11:48](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154962)

**19:**

In the UK, [this
list](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxford_Union#Past_officers) is quite
interesting. It lists now-prominent past Presidents of the Oxford Union
(which is the debating society of that University, not the student's
union).

If you check [the full
list](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presidents_of_the_Oxford_Union),
you'll see other familiar names such as Michael Gove.

It's not Oxford or Cambridge Universities as a whole, it's a tight
coterie within them that seems to spit out the politicians and political
commentators. The two Unions are the concentrators - if you're
politically minded, you'll end up in them, and those who gain the
presidency are frequently those already able to work the machineries.
Not all - my former brother in law is one who prefers being the gadfly
to working for elected office, unlike Hague who was two years later.

(And on the Cambridge side, the already-sort-of-mentioned Arianna
Huffington was a President.)\

[![Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)
| [February 8, 2013
12:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154966)

**20:**

@11: You ask "Well - you're proposing an (interesting!)answer to a
slightly different question - what is better than representative
democracy."

What we have is not "representative democracy", it is "democracy by
proxy".

Representative democracy would where the elected parliament actually
represent, in the sampling theory use of the word, the electorate as a
whole.

If you want that, just dispense with all the ballots, and pick your MP's
at random amongst the eligble persons, and make it a citizen duty, like
jury-service, to serve, once picked.

You'd get a Parliament with an average intelligence 10-20 percent lower
than today, but they would represent the electorate within a
statistically well defined uncertainty.

[![UngainlyTitan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1286)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[UngainlyTitan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1286)
| [February 8, 2013
12:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154970)

**21:**

Well from that analysis it does reflect the electorate in a lowest
common denominator type a way. At least in so far that a TV dinner
reflect a real dinner.\
 I think that we are looking at a convergence of several different
dynamics and the biggest one is too much information. When I were a lad
one could only buy 2 of Irelands 3 national newspapers with any
reliability and there was only one radio station and one TV station.
'Serious Newspapers' reported 'Serious News' now anyone can present a
headline about gossip involving fictional characters in the same manner
as the Latest Appalling thing happening in the real world. \
 As a culture we have no recent practise at working out the provenance
of information. Some people react by disbelieving anything that
contradicts their preferred notions, others believe nothing and the rest
believe that half of what their are told is lies but there is no
consensus on which half.\
 this will encourage the trend to the mediocre. Radicalism is dangerous,
it can lead to bad places, so we get this bouncing about the median.\
 One interesting development is the Obama big data and target
individuals and turn them into activists model.\
 If a focused outsider party could operate in this way they could out
manoeuvre the centre and radical change could come about. Whether that
would be good thing or bad remains to be seen.\
 Is there a better way, maybe, giving it legitimacy is an issue. there
is something to be said for a jury style upper house. Pick them at
random, pick enough to be pretty representative, pay then enough that
people would not mind serving and change them every 7 years. One term
only.\

[![helge.wilker](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1951)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
helge.wilker | [February 8, 2013
12:17](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154973)

**22:**

The current success of the various Pirate parties in European countries
shows that there are at least enough voters cognizant of this "failure
mode" in order to vote some of them into not inconsequential democratic
institutions (i. e. Swedish Pirates in the European Parliament, German
Pirates in the state parliaments of Berlin, Saarland and
Northrhine-Westphalia). Of course, their different approach to politics
immediately led to both media and internal voices shouting for them to
become more "professional" in order to compete better.

[![Kinabalu](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1953)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Kinabalu](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1953)
| [February 8, 2013
12:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154974)

**23:**

Depressingly I fear you have hit the nail on the head. The upcoming
Australian federal election presents two choices of the major parties
with little to choose between them. Mining and media interests dominate
and influence policy. And trying to change this is blocked by the
inertia you describe.

[![till](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1954)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/z6Eh4SFynopxu3mqG535HO35wBwj_VM-#720fe)
[till](https://me.yahoo.com/a/z6Eh4SFynopxu3mqG535HO35wBwj_VM-#720fe "https://me.yahoo.com/a/z6Eh4SFynopxu3mqG535HO35wBwj_VM-#720fe")
| [February 8, 2013
12:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154977)

**24:**

Coming from the slightly greenish version of beige (i.e., I earn my
money as researcher for the state Green party faction), I have two
questions/observations.

\1. How do new ideas enter this gridlocked system? You mention radical
new parties and culture change. The 30+ year history of environmentalism
and the (German) Green Party can be seen as both. It would be
interesting to see how/if a relatively strong Green party, proportional
representation and a population rather fond of environmental
consciousness worked together to establish stronger environmental
standards (or not). (Nota bene: as far as I know, this is an open
question - and it's not about how good/bad PV/nuclear/whatever is, but
about the interaction between "radical party", "culture change" and
"details of the representative system" resulting in different outcomes).

\2. I'm not sure who said it, but something along the line of
"representative democracy is bad, but it's the best we have found" rings
true to me. To put it the other way round: I see how one could make
better representative democracy by including elements of direct
democracy, but I can't see a working non-beige model of democracy.
Politics means expertise, and expertise isn't cheap. Even if it is only
expertise in power brokering. Thus the formation of factions and party
machines, forming the moulds for the next generation of politicans.
Throw media and their attention economy in the mix, and attention
maximization will start to influence politics.

[![woesinger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1945)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
woesinger | [February 8, 2013
12:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154979)

**25:**

Two nit-picks on random and jury-picking.

1: A parliament stacked with proponents of [insert political viewpoint
here] is a possible (if unlikely) outcome of truly random selection.
It's no biggie - but just remember that truly random selections can
produce outcomes that don't seem random (aka "OMG my iPod can read my
mind!").

2: The people that actually end up on a jury (as opposed to being
selected for jury service) are anything but random - once the defence
and the prosecution have winnowed out the ones they don't like the look
of.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
| [February 8, 2013
12:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154980)

**26:**

I'm actively involved in the LD party in London, and in the business of
selecting candidates and getting them elected, so my perspective on this
is coming from the other side. I'd say that you're about half right, but
you've missed the really big issue. I'll return to that later, and take
your points one at a time:

"Institutional survival pressure within organizations" - this one isn't
really applicable to us. Our candidates tend to be opposed to the status
quo and are often quite strange. I don't have much deep information on
the other parties, but I think they might suffer more from this one.
However, it will seem to you that our candidates don't talk about this
sort of thing much, and that's a systemic problem.

We are fundamentally committed to constitutional reform and breaking out
of the cycle of "two parties, zero differences". But all the canvassing,
polling, and election results indicates that the public at large isn't
very interested - something around a fifth of the population feels
strongly about it, and the rest thinks the system is working fine. That
has two important effects. Firstly, we can't get candidates elected if
we spend too much time talking about constitutional issues. Secondly,
the media will not print stories about it even when we send them a press
release, because they think "people aren't interested", so it's hard to
get the message out.

"The status quo has emerged by consensus between politicians of opposite
parties, who have converged on a set of policies that they deem least
likely to lose them an election" - yes, this is very much true. We are
sharply constrained by the need to win elections. In this sense,
representative democracy is "working": the candidates are all a bit
samey because they're all trying to fit themselves onto the beliefs of
the people they are representing. We're probably more resistent to
flagrant populism than the other two parties, and care less about
hostility from the corporate sector, but there's no point standing for
election with policies that nobody wants. We put our own spin on it, but
all three parties are working from the same hymn sheet - the opinions of
the voters. Inevitably our answers are quite similar.

"it's the combined set of policies that were historically least likely
to rock the boat" - actually not. While there is some sensitivity to
issues which have blown up in the past, we do a lot of polling and
surveying about what people *currently* think, and that's the primary
deciding factor in what policies we run with.

"The news cycle is dominated by large media organizations and the
interests of the corporate sector." - yes, this is a huge problem.
Worse, Clay Shirky's observations are extremely accurate in the UK
media. A national political journalist has minutes to write a story, not
days. That's enough time to type up a press release that you got from an
MP's office. It's not enough time to do anything else. Hence they do
little more than decide which press releases to print.

"The range of choices available at the democratic buffet table have
therefore narrowed until they're indistinguishable" - I would argue that
there are still differences between us, but it's certainly true that the
range of choices has narrowed. The main cause of this has been that all
players have much better information about the opinions of voters and
what it takes to get elected. It turns out that if you want to get
elected, you have to land within that fairly narrow range of choices, so
politicians are aiming there. While there are certainly people whose
opinions differ wildly from this norm, and probably a high fraction of
readers of this blog will fall into that category, the harsh reality is
that in any election those people are a tiny minority, and any candidate
who targets them will lose.

"Occasionally cultural shifts take place: over decades, they sometimes
reach a level of popular consensus that, when not opposed by corporate
stakeholders, leads to actual change" - absolutely true. Since we're
targetting the range of opinions that people are willing to vote for,
cultural shifts that expand the range of tolerable opinions let us take
up causes that were previously impossible. Marriage equality is a great
example: a hundred years ago, the Liberal party could never have taken
this position, but today there are enough people who agree with it that
we can make it happen.

"They have done so by converging on a common set of policies that do not
serve the public interest, but minimize the risk of the parties losing
the corporate funding they require in order to achieve re-election." -
the other two parties certainly suffer from this. We receive pretty
close to zero in direct corporate funding, so it's never really been an
issue for us. However, it is true that we don't always serve the public
interest. To borrow a phrase, "the public interest does not mean that
the public is interested", and we have to run with what the public is
interested in, rather than the public interest, because that's the only
way to win elections.

So, what's the really big issue? Since I've said it a few times, you'd
be forgiven for assuming I was going to say "public opinion", but it's
the other one. We are fundamentally constrained by the need to win
elections - that's the structural impact of representative democracies.
There are two essential things that you need to win an election. The
first is that you need is to be preferred by the voters in your
constituency, and I've already covered the impact that this has.

The second thing that you need to win an election is a candidate. It's
so obvious that you weren't expecting it, but this is a huge problem.
There are 65 million people in the UK. There are about 150 thousand
people involved in politics. **We don't get to pick the best and the
brightest**. We have to work with the people who show up and that is a
tiny fraction of the population. And yes, we do make huge efforts to
reach out to people outside politics and get them involved, but we
almost always get the same answers: "I couldn't do it. I don't have the
energy or the time. I have a job that keeps me busy. I need to edit
three books this year." It's a fair enough response - winning an
election demands a substantial time investment. If I was in Edinburgh,
I'd try to get Charlie to stand for us, and he'd say no for all the same
reasons. That's why politics doesn't include many people like Charlie.
Occasionally we do find somebody who says yes, and surprisingly often
those people end up winning - many of our strongest MPs and councillors
are from this group.

Sadly, most of the time they say no, and the election is coming and we
have to pick one of the three or four beige applicants that were willing
to stand as our candidate. It is always incredibly frustrating when this
happens, so we lie to ourselves and tell each other that they'll be a
great candidate, because we still need to motivate ourselves through an
election campaign. While I don't know what happens internally in the
other two parties, when all the nominations come in and I see three
unremarkable people on the list, it's a safe bet that they have the same
problem. Nobody with any sense wanted the job.

"And resistance is futile, because if you succeed in overthrowing the
beige dictatorship, you will become that which you opposed." - here's
where we diverge. The status quo that you describe is very real, and the
system does push strongly in that direction. But resistance is possible.
We can get Julian Huppert, Evan Harris, and Tim Farron elected. The
problem is that resistance is **exhausting** and so few people are
willing to do it. Many will complain bitterly, but they won't come out
and work to change things. Spectating is easy, and they can shout at the
TV instead of doing something about it.

(I shall try to respond to the inevitable replies, but I've got a stack
of letters to deliver and there's a by-election down in Eastleigh in
three weeks so my time's going to be limited)\

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
| [February 8, 2013
12:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154983)

**27:**

I think it important to note that "make a difference on the national
stage" is not necessarily the same as "governing well, passing good
laws, making people's lives better in whatever way you claimed you would
in your manifesto".

Which raises another issue - the Tories didn't say anything in their
manifesto about dismantling the education system or destroying the NHS
and selling it off to the private sector. Nevertheless that is what they
are doing. How are we supposed to get back at them for this given the
many different issues which people are involved in. E.g. they might vote
Tory because they believe in 'family values' and denying gay marriage,
never mind that Tory policies can be shown to be materially reducing
their standard of living.

This is also why of course there was a debate about whether left wing
parties and organisations should get involved in parliamentary politics.
It appears now that the revolutionary minded folk who said that the
lefties would get seduced by the way things were done and forget their
origins and purposes were correct.

[![amiannaq](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1461)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
amiannaq | [February 8, 2013
12:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154988)

**28:**

You're forgetting the corollary of converging on Beige™ policies, though
you've implied it. It's the systematic focussing on intractable (often
mareketed as "moral") issues for the purpose of distracting the populace
from other more immediately-important issues. For example, the
persistence of the "abortion debate" and the "gay marriage" issue in the
US, both of which serve to distract the populace from (1) the emergence
of the US police state and its corporate-run prison complexes, (2) the
lunatic sums of money (relative to total US budget and international
peers) thrown into the US military black hole and its multiple
colonial-imperialist battlefronts, and (3) global climate change,
amongst probably others.

[![Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)
| [February 8, 2013
12:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154990)

**29:**

\>\>\>But we've somehow slid into a developed-world global-scale
quasi-police state, with drone strikes and extraordinary rendition and
unquestioned but insane austerity policies being rammed down our
throats, government services being outsourced, peaceful protesters being
pepper-sprayed, tased, or even killed, police spying on political
dissidents becoming normal, and so on. What's happening?

Charlie, not that I think any of the things you mention here are good,
bu is this really a trend or just repercussions of 9/11 and the economic
crisis?

Because, you see, I skim all kinds of media, both right-wing, left-wing
and traditional. And they all have a news cycle. And they all tell me
about horrible things happening that I should be outraged about (they
have very different definitions on what is horrible, of course). And the
next month they all find new horrible things.

So my bullshit-blocker goes into overdrive and dismisses them all. And
I'm not left with much. I dunno, quality of life over the world keeps on
rising.

[![Y.](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1174)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Y.](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1174)
| [February 8, 2013
12:49](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154991)

**30:**

**\
 Pick eligble citizens to parliament using a scientifically backed
randomized method.\
**

\^\^This. Though I'd limit the parliament eligibility to people capable
of scoring respectably above average on some sort of intelligence test.
\
 IQ scores can be improved by practice, so even dumb but determined
people could get in.

Also, implement **partly direct democracy like the Swiss have**,
-important issues, large expenditures, taxes have to be approved by
voters.

Possibly, it'd be a good idea to also hold online voting on paragraphs
of laws, where the law-makers would have to convince a randomly selected
number of eligible voters that said paragraphs are necessary.\
 They could be renumerated for that, to increase attention.

That could cut down on loopholes for cronies in laws.

Also, more eyeballs spot more bugs, no?

**\
 The US House of Representatives is overwhelmingly dominated by folks
with law degrees (and this is not wholly inappropriate, given they're in
the job of making laws).\
**

It is wholly inappropriate.

Lawyers have a vested interest in laws being as complicated as possible,
because that gives them power.

Look at their fokking tax code, for example, or criminal code. No one
has even the slightest idea anymore of how many offences there are.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154990)
| [February 8, 2013
12:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154992)

**31:**

*quality of life over the world keeps on rising.*

Quality of life in China, India, Africa, and much of South America keeps
on rising. Quality of life in the recession-hit parts of the developed
world: not so much. Quality of life for anyone below the 80th percentile
in the USA: not so much. Quality of life in the Middle East: not so
much.

As for the zero-tolerance policing thing: if you've done nothing wrong
you have nothing to be afraid of, comrade.

[![darwinev0lved](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1106)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
darwinev0lved | [February 8, 2013
12:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154996)

**32:**

I think that there are actually two problems here.

There is Michel’s law about oligarchic capture but once you have
oligarchic capture, it is then much easier to influence / capture the
direction of politics.

There is also a separate question about the current state of political
parties in the UK (it could probably be broadened to the US but lets
keep focus). It’s not that long ago – OK, it’s actually a generation,
but still – when there was a genuinely functioning left labour party. It
got creamed by the Tories in 83 but from 45 to, let’s say92, there was a
social-democratic alternative to the Tories. This may not be
revolutionary but it’s not to be sniffed at.\
 No doubt part (and only part) of the move to the centre of the Labour
party is due to the breaking of and breaking with the unions – which did
use to offer a genuine alternative path in to politics that the one you
describe. \
 You also have to look at the change in media presentation, and media
politics too for an additional factor in the, for want of a better word,
professionalisation of politics. (though when you look at some of the
idiots on the backbenches of both parties, you do have to wonder about
this so-called trend).

But I think a lot of the above does not happen, or does not happen as
easily, if you can fix / avoid oligarchic capture.

How can this be done? Interestingly this was a problem that interested
the radical right for a time too – anybody else remember the 94 Contract
with America a major part of which was the limitation of terms to twelve
years. It didn’t get the 2/3 majority needed to pass but term limits is
one way to try to reduce the effect of oligarchic capture – does anybody
really need to be a politican for more than ten to twelve years?

But term limits are a really boring possible & partial solution. A
friend of mine used to argue that we need to rethink the function of the
second house. He suggested that membership of the second house should be
by lottery [edit – somebody else has already suggested this, glad I’m
not alone], if your number comes up, that’s it for five years (one year
of mandatory training in how parliament runs, how laws are made,
basically a-level politics, economics and media studies) and then four
years of being let loose with no other mandate than serve your country.

You can incentivise it if you want – basic wage of £30,000 a year
£150,000 at the end of five years on meeting basic turning up, speaking
in debates, voting record kind of things, if you want – but that may not
be necessary, depends on how cynical you are about people in general. \
 Oh and before anybody sounds off about the general population being let
loose on the political process – rewatch the quality of debate over gay
marriage and adjust your beliefs about professional politicians.
Seriously, I’ve seen better arguments in pubs between drunk cabbies (to
mash up two stereotypes).

You’ve then got to decide how the balance of powers between the two
houses is set up – and whether you’d be willing to accept the occasional
bit of gridlock, but how much gridlock there’d be, who knows? I don’t
think we can presume to know a priori.

Of course, this changes the meaning of 'representative democracy'
somewhat, but it's worth remembering that because of the vagaries of
history, our second house is anything but representative at the moment.

So there are my two suggestions : term limits and a second house elected
by lottery\
 None of this does anything about oligarchic capture of the civil
service but I’m less sure that’s a major problem in the UK for the
moment. Anyway, one thing at a time !

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
| [February 8, 2013
12:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155000)

**33:**

@Vanzetti: we've had drone strikes, extraordinary rendition and torture
for ten years now. Neo-liberal/Freidmannian political economics for 20
to 30 years. These are not fads.

It is true that the quality of life rises. Also, inequalities and
violence diminish. These are true averaged all over the world and over
centuries. But now we are in a local minimum. It might be good to keep
the larger picture in mind ("think of the starving little children in
Africa"), but it should anaesthesise the consciousness of the very real
present problems.

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
| [February 8, 2013
13:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155002)

**34:**

PS: as a matter of fact, most of the rise in quality of life in the West
has been confiscated by the 0.001% for years now. See "plutonomy".

[![Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)
| [February 8, 2013
13:03](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155003)

**35:**

\>\>\>Quality of life in the recession-hit parts of the developed world:
not so much.

Erm. I assume that's because it is recession-hit. The world regularly
have economic crises. Any reasons why this one is different?

[![Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)
replied to [this comment from
cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155000)
| [February 8, 2013
13:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155004)

**36:**

\>\>\> we've had drone strikes, extraordinary rendition and torture for
ten years now. Neo-liberal/Freidmannian political economics for 20 to 30
years. These are not fads.

OK. And before that we had the Cold War.

[![Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Vanzetti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1155)
replied to [this comment from
cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155002)
| [February 8, 2013
13:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155006)

**37:**

\>\>\>PS: as a matter of fact, most of the rise in quality of life in
the West has been confiscated by the 0.001% for years now. See
"plutonomy"

I'm not talking about pure GDP per capita, but stuff like this:
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human\_Development\_Index](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_Development_Index)

[![http://kryogenix.org/days/](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1952)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://kryogenix.org/days/)
[http://kryogenix.org/days/](http://kryogenix.org/days/ "http://kryogenix.org/days/")
| [February 8, 2013
13:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155007)

**38:**

I need to formulate further thoughts on all this, but one thing: if
randomly choosing people works for parliament, why won't it also work
for, say, choosing welders? Or people to build my next house? I should
just pick someone off the street to build a house, whether they're a
builder or not?

If it doesn't work for welders then I don't think it works for
parliamentary representatives either. The random choice idea bespeaks a
particular view of the government: that a representative is there to be
a mouthpiece for their constituency. That's not representative
democracy. That's everyone-votes-on-everything "true" democracy; it's
just a convenient way to organise it. A representative does more than
just poll their constituents and then report the majority verdict. Being
a politician is a skilled trade in itself, like welding is. It is
possible that this point is precisely one of the things that Charlie is
identifying as the problem, I admit. But I think that proposing "choose
people at random" is not "how to make representative democracy better",
it's proposing a different political system entirely.\

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154940)
| [February 8, 2013
13:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155008)

**39:**

*Pick eligble citizens to parliament using a scientifically backed
randomized method.\
 ...\
 Sure, there are downsides, but I have a hard time seeing them be worse
than the current medio-cleptocracy.*

I've heard Martin Luther once said he'd rather be ruled by a smart
Muslim than a Christian fool.

I think you're advocating that the fool is OK. We've had some fools get
elected around here locally. I'd rather give them easier access to the
levers thank you.\

[![GoCaptain](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1157)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[GoCaptain](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1157)
| [February 8, 2013
13:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155010)

**40:**

'As for the zero-tolerance policing thing: if you've done nothing wrong
you have nothing to be afraid of, comrade.'

Coffee, keyboard, that sort of thing. It's the final 'comrade' that does
it, I think.

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
| [February 8, 2013
13:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155013)

**41:**

@Vanzetti: The Western block managed the entire Cold War maintaining
traditions and regulations of Human Rights and "Rechtsstaat" (or rule of
law).

For a decade, the USA have descended into arbitrary abductions,
arbitrary detention, arbitrary assassinations, and open usage of
torture; a staggering proportion of their allies have practiced the same
or are complicit in US practices. Lesser behaviour has also taken place:
general surveillance (including illegal but State-sanctionned),
infiltration of harmless dissident groups, exemplary punishment of
dissent (you could say that in the last years, we have seen the
appearance of Western political prisonners).

Something definitly has changed, and there is a case to say that the
change is radical.\

[![aigarius](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1605)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
aigarius | [February 8, 2013
13:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155014)

**42:**

The key here is if the system allows and makes it easy for new parties
to enter the power struggle - it that is so, then existing parties can
not become too bland as going too centrist would allow for too much
space on both left and right for new parties to enter and grab a share
of the voters (for any definition of left-center-right). If, on the
other hand, you are basically locked into existing parties (like US is),
then, well that democracy is basically screwed. Their best hope is to
implement recursive democracies inside each of the existing parties.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028) |
[February 8, 2013
13:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155015)

**43:**

*Decriminalization of drug use, on the other hand, would be catastrophic
for the budget of policing organizations and the prison-industrial
complex:*

I think this bugs you way out of proportion to it's size. As best I can
tell in the US prisons at all levels account for 0.5% of GDP. (Which is
way higher than I'd like.) But there are many other sectors of the
economy which have much more clout. Health care is over 25 times as big.
The auto industry about 10 times or more bigger.

The single biggest impediment to changing drug laws in the US is the
Evangelical church. No matter what the costs prohibition is better than
legalization like alcohol. They could care less what politicians think.
They want it banned and enforced. Even if it means locking up 99% of the
population.

[![napadvocacy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1957)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[napadvocacy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1957)
| [February 8, 2013
13:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155016)

**44:**

I think that what you are describing is nothing new, though you are
right to identify these specific problems. Extrajudicial killings,
domestic spying, mistreatment of protesters etc. have been happening as
long as democracy has existed--longer in fact. The difference now is
that we are more aware of what is happening as it is happening. The
Secret War in Cambodia did not come out completely until the late 90s.
Today, in contrast, we learn of the drone strikes in Pakistan, Yemen,
and elsewhere in real time. To me, this looks not like a new failure
mode of democracy, but rather improved transparency in an increasingly
connected world. It's a new set of challenges, or more precisely, it's
we the people becoming aware of a problem set in need of solutions.
Where our parents' generation faced Communism and their parents faced
Fascism, we face these issues. Those generations (in the US at least)
also dealt with the Depression, Vietnam, Civil Rights, and dozens of
other domestic political problems. They found solutions and I hope we do
as well. So I guess my point is that this is not a novel 'failure mode,'
but rather is an example of how democracy works. Representative
democracy is a problem solving process and problem solving begins with
identifying the problem. Discovering a problem and encountering a new
failure mode are two ways of describing the same phenomenon. The
difference is that you describe it as something new, rather than the
continuation of an iterated problem solving process.

[![rou.xenophobe](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1956)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[rou.xenophobe](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1956)
| [February 8, 2013
13:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155018)

**45:**

The idea that there's no meaningful choice between major parties ignores
pretty much the entire sweep of American politics since 1980.
Behaviorally, the choice between parties in the US is now more stark
than at any point since the (US) Civil War.

Likewise, the idea that politics has gone wrong because of a class of
apparatchiks who are all the same across parties can't possibly apply to
the US. Outside of a very few states most of our real WTF? problems
don't come from professional-ish apparatchiks, they come from the random
small business owners and assorted mindless yahoos who get elected to
state legislatures. Parties don't reject mindless yahoos because they
can't -- they can't afford to, because their alternative is often simply
nobody (because being a state legislator is a terrible job), and they
can't because they do not have the legal capacity to do so. Without a
truly vast amount of time in court, whoever wins the primary is the
nominee, no matter what the party organization thinks about it.

Why lots of Europe has austerity isn't some mystery: you elected tories,
and austerity is what tories do. Likewise, the small Keynesian package
in the US died because Americans overall were stupid enough to hand
control of the House to Boehner and his pack of dumbfucks, and
Massachussetts was hit by the stupid-ray so hard that they handed
significant power to Mitch McFuckingConnell.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
| [February 8, 2013
13:37](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155023)

**46:**

Suggestion - Add a "none of the above" option as well as voting Condem,
Liebour or whatever. Instead of requiring that people turn out to vote
NOTB, treat a failure to actively vote or a spoilt ballot as NOTB.
Candidates are only elected if they actually return more votes than
there are NOTBs. If NOTB wins, this triggers a new election for this
seat, and none of the original candidates may stand this time.\

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
| [February 8, 2013
13:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155028)

**47:**

@napadvocacy: some of the problems we are facing now have been
\*created\* by the democratically elected powers. A good example for
this is the legal limbo in which the detainees of Guatanamo are held,
which has prevented the closure of the prison and any elegant outcome.
Another is the surveillance system put in place in the USA, where the
State is clearly hostile, or at least suspicious, of its own population.

\

[![catvincent](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1958)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://catvincent.wordpress.com/)
[catvincent](http://catvincent.wordpress.com/ "http://catvincent.wordpress.com/")
| [February 8, 2013
13:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155029)

**48:**

Worth noting I think that today has the arrival of a new UK far-right
wing party, founded by a former National Front committee member:\

[http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/02/neo-nazi-former-bnp-members-launch-new-far-right-party](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/02/neo-nazi-former-bnp-members-launch-new-far-right-party)

Perhaps inevitably, it is called the British Democratic Party.

What role do such parties play in the enBeigening process?

[![roystgnr](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1959)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
roystgnr | [February 8, 2013
13:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155032)

**49:**

> *Decriminalization of drug use, on the other hand, would be
> catastrophic for the budget of policing organizations and the
> prison-industrial complex: it might be popular in some circles, but
> the people who count the money won't let it pass without a fight.*

Is this a prediction?

I'd be more inclined to predict that decriminalization laws haven't been
passing due to unpopularity rather than due to conspiracy theory. In the
USA, support for mere marijuana decriminalization only passed 50% a year
ago, and that support is still heavily weighted towards younger
demographics that are less likely to vote. That's already been enough
for complete decriminalization in a couple states' laws. Unless the
rapid increase in popular support reverses (which is what happened a
couple generations ago, but I wouldn't bet on it this time) the main
obstacle to changing US federal law is simply the lag time introduced by
the high incumbency rate in Congress.

That incumbency rate is another ugly effect of party politics you forgot
to mention. In a nationally two-party system, game theory pushes both
parties' platforms towards the median views of the electorate, but local
electorates lean towards one side or the other compared to the whole.
This makes it extremely hard to unseat an incumbent from the more
locally-popular side with a challenger from the other party, and party
insiders are very good at applying pressure against unapproved primary
challengers in already-held districts.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
| [February 8, 2013
14:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155036)

**50:**

See also, [this interview by the LSE with Professor Colin
Crouch](http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/archives/30297).
Sample: "A post-democratic society is one that continues to have and to
use all the institutions of democracy, but in which they increasingly
become a formal shell".

[![jamesandrewduncan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1962)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jamesandrewduncan | [February 8, 2013
14:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155037)

**51:**

"What role do such parties play in the enBeigening process?"

They sit outside it due to first past the post, further delegitimising
the extremes and effectively reinforcing the political middle by
draining off voters into parties that will never have any success.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
roystgnr](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155032)
| [February 8, 2013
14:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155038)

**52:**

*In a nationally two-party system, game theory pushes both parties'
platforms towards the median views of the electorate, but local
electorates lean towards one side or the other compared to the whole.*

Only if you have local constituencies. A national electoral system that
relies on a party list system and some version of PR (be it the German
threshold-based system or Israeli pure PR) breaks the link between
representatives and local issues.

Arguably, this may be a *better* form of special-interest representation
in these days of ubiquitous internet access: we could have the (small
but active) Internet Civil Liberties Party, for example, holding down a
couple of seats and a portfolio in a national-level coalition, whereas
today we have the MP for Lesser Potting, who is really good mates with
the local business owners but doesn't give a shit about national-level
issues and votes the way Party HQ tell him to.

[![http://www.nickbarlow.com/blog/](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1961)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.nickbarlow.com/blog/)
[http://www.nickbarlow.com/blog/](http://www.nickbarlow.com/blog/ "http://www.nickbarlow.com/blog/")
replied to [this comment from
catvincent](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155029)
| [February 8, 2013
14:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155039)

**53:**

*What role do such parties play in the enBeigening process?*\
 Probably very good at creating boundaries and establishing the idea
that anything not-beige is dangerous. Any idea that's not in the beige
mainstream (the beigestream?) can be associated to some 'fringe' group
and thus anyone advocating it can be linked to all the other policies
they espouse. Not necessarily linked to the far-right, but look how
anyone who advocates vaguely Green policies can get tarred with 'well,
you must believe all the other nonsense they espouse too'.

Also as a 'if we fall, look what will take our place' message to
preserve the beige.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1963)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1963)
| [February 8, 2013
14:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155040)

**54:**

"What a beautiful world this will be\
 What a glorious time to be free\
 On that train all graphite and glitter\
 Undersea by rail\
 Ninety minutes from New York to Paris\
 A just machine to make big decisions\
 Programmed by fellows with compassion and vision\
 We'll be clean when their work is done\
 We'll be eternally free yes and eternally young"

"IGY" by Donald Fagen

[![Raymond](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1816)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/AU5Pg2Vjn4.MVE5n1Sh8aR78Ess-#77991)
[Raymond](https://me.yahoo.com/a/AU5Pg2Vjn4.MVE5n1Sh8aR78Ess-#77991 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/AU5Pg2Vjn4.MVE5n1Sh8aR78Ess-#77991")
| [February 8, 2013
14:17](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155043)

**55:**

You wouldn't want the wrong lizard to get in....

The late, great Douglas Adams has addressed this obvious flaw in
democracy.

[http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/162557-it-comes-from-a-very-ancient-democracy-you-see-you](http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/162557-it-comes-from-a-very-ancient-democracy-you-see-you)

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155038)
| [February 8, 2013
14:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155050)

**56:**

The only slight problem with party lists is that they surely help
maintain a party oligarchy, with the only people getting on the lists
being friends of the right people.

[![navigatingbythestarsatnight](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1964)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
navigatingbythestarsatnight | [February 8, 2013
14:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155052)

**57:**

I think the implication is that citizens who want change should focus on
organizing and participating in direct action: starting workers' co-ops,
organizing unions, launching B-type or triple-bottom-line corporations,
civil disobedience, and so on.

Improvements sometimes come from the political process, so I don't argue
for disengagement, but often they occur as the establishment system
accommodates itself to a genuine threat in the form of direct action or
organization.

[![Simian](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1802)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Simian](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1802)
| [February 8, 2013
14:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155056)

**58:**

Yup, sounds about right.

If I actually did have my notes on me, I could tell you the name of the
most well known person who has articulated the idea.

[![Simian](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1802)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Simian](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1802)
replied to [this comment from
Simian](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155056)
| [February 8, 2013
14:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155057)

**59:**

Damn html formatting.

The first line was:

"Consults Economics & Politics degree notes"

[![combinatorialimplosion](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1960)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
combinatorialimplosion | [February 8, 2013
14:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155061)

**60:**

I'd like to posit an alternative (or perhaps complementary) hypothesis
that what you have described can be accounted for, at least in part, by
far quicker convergence on the revealed, as opposed to stated,
preferences of the electorate by the major parties. One might think that
the polarization of the parties that we see in the US (for example) as
evidence to the contrary, but I think that can be explained largely in
terms of the electorate itself. Instead of a nice bell curve (whether
Gaussian or not), on some of the important issues of the day there is
more of a bi-modal distribution, hence elected officials converge on two
conflicting positions.

I think that further evidence for this can be seen in the response of
elected officials to shifts of the electoral distribution over time. On
the issue of marriage equality that you mentioned, the Obama
Administration, for example, was initially slow to act. I would put this
down to bad memories of what happened to Bill Clinton when gays in the
military was the first big issue it tackled. As it became clear that the
attitude of the electorate, especially those who would be willing to
vote for Obama anyway was changing rapidly in favor of gay marriage:
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public\_opinion\_of\_same-sex\_marriage\_in\_the\_United\_States](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_opinion_of_same-sex_marriage_in_the_United_States)
the Administration's position began "evolving" with similar speed.

As to alternatives to democracy in its current configuration, I can see
a range of possible fixes which might make things a tad less
dysfunctional. On the moderate side, we are already seeing some
experiments in trying to do away with gerrymandering:
[http://davidbrin.blogspot.com/2012/11/gerrymandering-as-it-declines.html](http://davidbrin.blogspot.com/2012/11/gerrymandering-as-it-declines.html)
Experiments on the more radical end of the spectrum are also at least
conceivable. I have always wanted to see what would happen with an
experiment in weighted voting (as depicted in Don Kingsbury's "Courtship
Rite") where one has the option of registering predictions of the
consequences of policies to gain extra voting weight if proven correct.
The most important point in this is that we are far from exhausting the
ways in which democracy could be implemented and it is certainly
premature to alternatives. In this matter I am very risk averse, with
excellent historical justification for being so.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155023)
| [February 8, 2013
14:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155067)

**61:**

*If NOTB wins, this triggers a new election for this seat, and none of
the original candidates may stand this time.*

This might work in systems without fixed election dates but in the US it
would rapidly lead to lots of empty seats.

[![roberth2309](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1498)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
roberth2309 | [February 8, 2013
15:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155073)

**62:**

Something you've missed. The whole system is clogging up with
prescriptive laws... it's a bit like cholesterol and the clogging is
getting worse as the system ages.\
 Instead of rethinking policies about drug abuse, we kowtow to the
existing system and throw more detailed policies and micromanagement at
it. Excessive and over complicated laws combined with mandatory
sentencing is drowning us all. Where I come from, it is more important
for a policeman to meet his quota of busts than to solve serious
crimes.\
 One possible way out of this gridlock is to preface every law with a
social justification for its existence, a list of social deliverables
that have to be achieved in a certain time frame and a sunset clause
that forces bad laws to be re-evaluated or abolished after a certain
time period. I think of this mandatory re-evaluation as a sort of social
"statin".\
 As an afterthought, I don't think the intelligence or social background
of elected officials makes one iota of difference.

[![Ryan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1195)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ouuc9ZQEipNEeAXMT8ip4Gp47y4tcjDdLhA8hO4LFOhEfUnTgc2z#6cb79)
[Ryan](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ouuc9ZQEipNEeAXMT8ip4Gp47y4tcjDdLhA8hO4LFOhEfUnTgc2z#6cb79 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/ouuc9ZQEipNEeAXMT8ip4Gp47y4tcjDdLhA8hO4LFOhEfUnTgc2z#6cb79")
| [February 8, 2013
15:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155074)

**63:**

I'm all for a variant of PR and a new form of voting (perhaps some form
of approval voting?) over FPTP plurality voting systems. The latter
creates disenfranchisement and runs straight into Duverger's law, though
I do think that some mechanism needs to be in place for local politics
to fit neatly into the government structure.

For me the problem facing making a system better than we have now is two
fold: how do we get more people involved without creating a crippling
bureaucracy and how to we ensure that people are informed. The first
point tries to tackle the issue of career and institutional politics and
the latter special interest groups.

Honestly though I'm struggling not to be pessimistic about the future of
democracy. Modern propaganda (advertising, public relations etc) is far
more advanced than mechanisms of the past I.e. the divine right of
kings. Given the nature of some political and economic discussions I've
been a part of it seems it's easy to convince people that the system is
great and working just like they want to. This is even easier to achieve
if people aren't educated formally or kept up to date with how things
are different in other countries (who has heard of the Icelandic
revolution in western media? You'd almost think nothing has happened
since their banks collapsed other than an ask cloud). I have a worry
that the future will resemble a worse political/economical set up than
even the US has with working class people believing that their situation
is much better than if there was social provision and if they just work
harder and smarter they will easily climb a career ladder to the
dizzying heights of wealth of the 0.01%. It seems a great way to keep
people poor is the illusion that they could get rich if only they did
something to deserve it.

[![cabalamat](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1922)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://cabalamat.wordpress.com/)
[cabalamat](http://cabalamat.wordpress.com/ "http://cabalamat.wordpress.com/")
| [February 8, 2013
15:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155078)

**64:**

> I could take out Israeli citizenship and run for the Knesset, but I'd
> be running as "the Charlie Stross Party", not as myself: if I was a
> runaway success I'd need to find some extra representatives to tag
> along on my coat-tails.

That's true, but it's hardly a big hurdle, because after all if you
couldn't find people to support you, you'd never be able to be a runaway
success. Israel's system \*is\* a lot more open to new parties/ideas
than Westminster is -- for example Yair Lapid's new party (founded last
year) just got 19 seats in the Knesset.

The Scottish system is somewhere halfway between the Westminster system
and the Israeli one -- there is PR, but with a higher threshold (6% v.
2%).

[![daniel.duffy20](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1356)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
daniel.duffy20 replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154992)
| [February 8, 2013
15:20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155082)

**65:**

Your fellow SF writer David Brin has an intersting take on why this is
so. We can thank/blame General George Marshall:

The United States of America has been the most exceptional thing ever to
happen to humanity. I say this not out of reflex triumphalism or
chauvinism, but as a simple matter of outcomes appraisal. Indeed, I bet
that in the grand context of time, the American Experiment will turn out
to have been one of the major reasons, if we wind up succeeding as a
species and even reaching for the stars....\
 \
 Most moderns have no idea how stunning the American Revolution seemed,
to onlookers around the world. Especially the example of "Cincinnatus"
George Washington, who turned his back on power not once but three
times. Or Abraham Lincoln, whose legend penetrated all the way to tribes
deep in the Caucuses, as told by none other than Leo Tolstoy.

If Britain and France had listened to U.S. President Woodrow Wilson in
1919, and imposed a gentle peace on Germany, there would have been no
Weimar Depression, no seething resentment leading to Hitler.

Later, in 1945, when America stood as the world's behemoth, men like
George Marshall, Dean Acheson, Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower had
their chance to impose structure on the world, an imperial peace or
"pax," as had Rome, China, Babylon and Britain in their day. The long
(comparative) peace that ensued - Pax Americana - was deeply flawed in
many ways. But compared to all other "pax" eras -- and especially to the
lawless times in between -- it was the gentlest ever known.\
 \
 Certainly it was beloved by those we defeated in war. Today the U.S.
has no better friends than those former foes who benefited from the plan
of the 20th Century's greatest man.

Marshall aimed to avoid a core mistake of every previous pax empire. All
the others - even Britain - set up mercantilist trade patterns that
sucked fortune out of distant satrapies and fed gold back to the central
kingdom, fostering poverty and resentment everywhere else, making
inevitable a later collapse.

In contrast, the counter-mercantilist pattern imposed by Marshall's
unusual Pax Americana favored transferring low level, labor intensive
industries (e.g. textiles) en masse to poor regions around the globe in
a cascade sequence that uplifted, successively, Germany and Japan, then
Korea and Taiwan, then Malaysia and Singapore and so on, until right now
this program of "foreign aid via WalMart" is raising up more than a
billion people in China and India at the same time.

The core of modern development, this innovation is the number one reason
that two thirds of children on this planet live in clean homes with
electricity and sanitation, never hungry, and go to school every day. A
program fueled in large measure by the American consumer, thanks to wise
patterns enacted a lifetime ago. Patterns unique in the long and
lamentable history of human empires.\
 \
 - Prof David Brin\

[![neville.kuyt](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1965)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
neville.kuyt | [February 8, 2013
15:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155087)

**66:**

Much of your hypothesis seems broadly right; however, I think the likely
thing that causes us to break out of this cycle isn't the invention of
some new form of democracy.

One of the side effects of the oligarchical need for self-preservation,
and the need to win elections, is that we generally don't have long-term
strategies, so problems which are likely to take more than 5 years to
have an appreciable impact tend to be ignored. There are some
well-documented long-term risks - global warming, resource depletion,
acidification of the oceans - which nobody wants to tackle.

For "the West", there are additional long-term risks - the productivity
gap with the emerging economies, the demographic changes with an aging
population, the underfunding of pensions.

The most depressing failure of representative democracy is that these
long-term issues are so toxic that no political party wants to touch
them - anyone who suggests you might have to pay more for your petrol,
take a lower salary, and work until you're 75 is unlikely to bring in
the votes...

The other observation is that the causes and symptoms you identify have
been around for at least 150 years - the political class has always been
drawn from a fairly small pool, the media has always been powerful,
large corporations have always exercised influence.

I think there is a element which explains the current situation: the
lack of a credible alternative.

Whilst there was an external threat, with a radically different system,
the self preservation instinct meant that political parties firstly had
to keep moving society forward, otherwise the Soviets would invade; it
also meant they had to spread the wealth a little more equally, because
the working class had seen a successful revolution re-distributing the
wealth.\

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
| [February 8, 2013
15:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155088)

**67:**

A sociologist named Mancur Olson has written extensively about this sort
of thing. His analysis goes like this:

- Politics (democratic or otherwise) rewards groups that can take
concerted action on highly specific agendas, i.e. interest groups.

- Interest groups take time, even decades, to really set up and get
rolling.

- Interest groups are basically conservative. They're mostly concerned
with protecting their interests. Expanding their interest comes a
distant second, everything else gets ignored.

- The political process is full of little choke points where an interest
group can dig in, get influence over a particular, small set of decision
makers, and block actions that they don't like.

- Over time, the increasing proliferation of entrenched interest groups
results in gridlock and ossification of the political process.

- Politicians, having seen wave after wave of hopeful reformers
slaughtered in the no-man's land of political process, go beige. The
idea is to be inoffensive enough to burrow into some tiny corner of the
process, at which point you become one of the people interest groups go
to when a reform needs to be killed. Reward follows.

- History keeps happening. Eventually the ossified system goes
completely up its own ass. When a change happens that the system cannot
ignore but is too ossified to accommodate, the system collapses and
another system is built.

- Repeat.

[![Derek
Harter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1966)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Derek
Harter](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1966)
| [February 8, 2013
15:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155091)

**68:**

I always thought Suarez's "Daemon"/"Freedom" novels were a lot about
these same issues (if I can bring up other author/science fiction works
here).

Look out, if Charlie is a) smarter and b) a better hacker than we think
him to be, perhaps his unstated answer to his own question (of what a
non-failure mode representative democracy might look like) is Charlie's
own Sobol's Daemon.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155067)
| [February 8, 2013
15:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155092)

**69:**

*This might work in systems without fixed election dates but in the US
it would rapidly lead to lots of empty seats*\
 And the issue is? I was specifically trying to design a system that
forces politicians to make people actually **want** to vote, and the
best idea I've come up with since I first met Andy Nimmo (yes the one of
ASTRA Glasgow "fame". This may mean nothing to most of you) in about
1990 is to offer a "none of the above" option.

[![daniel.duffy20](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1356)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
daniel.duffy20 | [February 8, 2013
15:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155098)

**70:**

When I read Frank Herbert's Whiping Star and Dosadi novels I wondered
how exactly something like Jorge McKie's Bureau of Sabotage (BuSab)
would actually work.

Is something like this the answer to the danger of political
ossification? Could such an organization actually exist? How would it
function? Get budgeting? Avoid becoming just another cog in the status
quo.

(Off subject: And why hasn't Dosadi ever been made into a movie -
similar themes as Dune, but a lot easier to film.)

[![akicif](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1142)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
akicif replied to [this comment from
daniel.duffy20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155082)
| [February 8, 2013
15:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155099)

**71:**

@65 - Oh dear. I remember Brin advancing this hypothesis at a con in
Scotland when he was living in the UK back in the eighties. The only
more stunned silence I've ever heard at an Albacon was when Ellison said
something along the lines of "British, Scottish, Irish or Welsh -
whatever, you're all English" and go on to explain it was silly to have
so many different labels for such a small place.

But to address the ball, not the man: yes, no-one denies that America
did some Good Things. But so did Rome and Byzantium, and we probably
remember more of the Bad Stuff from those days (applies also to the last
years of the British Empire, too, for that matter).

I really don't see America being any different - or China in another
couple of generations.

[![justin.boden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1023)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
justin.boden | [February 8, 2013
15:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155100)

**72:**

"peaceful protesters being pepper-sprayed, tased, or even killed"

this always happened. it's just that the protestors have to be white
rich kids before the media takes notice.

[![default.fuzz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1056)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
default.fuzz | [February 8, 2013
16:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155108)

**73:**

I'm a little bit proud of the fact, and interested to see the end result
of Bristol electing an independent mayor, and an independent police
commissioner, seemingly as a way of giving the finger to the three main
parties.

Mind you, Bristol was the only city to vote to have it's own mayor, so
maybe people here just like being different.

[![aggray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1330)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
aggray | [February 8, 2013
16:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155111)

**74:**

One could say that the US system is an attempt to fix the Monarchy. The
President is basically an elected monarch, originally without term
limits, and counterbalanced by one group of legislators representing the
wealthy and another representing the larger people.

As for what replaces Democracy... assuming there is no reversion to
another form like monarchy or feudalism, some form of anarchy is
probably the next step. I know people are skeptical and say anarchy
won't work, but they also said that about democracy and republics once.
The key is a combination of the right structure with a
population/society that is ready for it.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
akicif](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155099)
| [February 8, 2013
16:20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155112)

**75:**

Which bit? *If Britain and France had listened to U.S. President Woodrow
Wilson in 1919, and imposed a gentle peace on Germany, there would have
been no Weimar Depression, no seething resentment leading to Hitler.* is
only even unusual in the implied claim that the USA did not seek
punative reparations and/or humiliating demilitarisation from Germany.

[![chrisdonia](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1968)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
chrisdonia | [February 8, 2013
16:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155113)

**76:**

And this also explains why, although the first terms of the Scottish
Parliament were gradualy filling with non-mainstream parties (3 in
1999,17 in 2003) they slipped away (3 in 2007 and in 2011) leaving the
beiges to play their party games.

Party politics is horrible and anti-democratic.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
| [February 8, 2013
16:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155116)

**77:**

rouxenophobe@45\
 "the choice between parties in the US is now more stark" Stable
meritocracy and noblesse oblige vs a slide into a high tech middle ages
(it would be so cool--in a video game).

roberth @62 \
 Maybe there should be a limit on the maximum size of the whole of
current statutes, say 1 million words, so that in order to make new laws
old ones would have to be repealed. In the US that would lead to brief
statutes being built into detailed executive branch regulations. Perhaps
that's the crux of what you are talking about. Detailed prescription is
the legislative branch getting into the business of the executive
branch.

"One possible way out of this gridlock is to preface every law with a
social justification for its existence"

I was thinking about something like that regarding the **US Constitution
as Living Document** issue. Here's the deal. Currently the
constitutionality of a statute is judged by the judiciary from one of
two perspectives. One school of thought tries to determine original
intent. The other considers the constitution a living document whose
meaning evolves with the times. Both have pros and cons. But is this
function of keeping the document alive being performed by the judiciary
only because the legislature is silent? Who says only the judiciary can
breath life? Why could lawmakers not preface statutes with explanations
of how they would like the words of the constitution to be interpreted
in new ways to justify the statute? Then the judges could decide if the
justification has strayed too far and has nothing to do with even the
words. If the legislative branch wasn't broken this would be a great
idea for them.

ryan@63\
 " it seems it's easy to convince people that the system is great "\
 Most people know it's messed up and doubt there's any way to fix it.
That's why they are increasingly just trying to get their own and think
short term. It's all they think they can do. The ship is sinking, fine,
how do I make sure I get on a lifeboat?

"how do we get more people involved without creating a crippling
bureaucracy "

I've got an idea for how to redo democracy, if you could do it from
scratch. It all hinges on a monocameral legislature which operates on
codified procedural rules that it cannot itself alter. This legislature
selects the executive. Citizens vote, but not at regular intervals.
Instead, each citizen is publicly on record as supporting a particular
candidate for a seat in the legislature. It's printed, it's in a
database, multiple redundancy. At any time any citizen can go change his
or her support to a different person. There's a minimum threshold to get
a seat in the legislature. If you have enough supporters, citizens whose
ONE vote is currently on record to support you being there, then you get
a seat. If your number of supporters goes below the threshold, you're
out. Maybe have a nonvoting category for those with over half the
threshold amount so those about to get a seat will know what's going on
and be on hand if they "go threshold."

\
 danielduffy@65\
 Statesmen are rare. How long before Marshall's influence fades? Was it
a spark that lit a fire that will never go out?

DerkeHarter @68 Those novel's by Suarez are a really good example of
self publishing succeeding. Also *Freedom* in particular depicted a
really cool alternative economy. Best of breed, if not unique. But
toward an electoral system they serve only as a cautionary tale about
putting too much faith in computers.

-------------\
 Also, this unrelated thought that popped into my head while I was
driving on the interstate in a snow storm.\
 Randians and Marxists elevate means as ends because their systems
recognize no higher purpose in the world and there is nothing else
available, but they recognize that people get depressed without a sense
of higher purpose. There was more but I hit a pothole going through
Scranton. North I-81: warning if anyone should go that way.

[![meta404](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1969)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
meta404 | [February 8, 2013
16:45](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155119)

**78:**

I assume you're aware that Washington and Jefferson both warned of the
dangers to society that political parties represented? From Washington's
farewell address:

> The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the
> spirit of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different
> ages and countries has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is
> itself a frightful despotism. But this leads at length to a more
> formal and permanent despotism. The disorders and miseries, which
> result, gradually incline the minds of men to seek security and repose
> in the absolute power of an individual; and sooner or later the chief
> of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than his
> competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own
> elevation, on the ruins of Public Liberty.
>
> Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind, (which
> nevertheless ought not to be entirely out of sight,) the common and
> continual mischiefs of the spirit of party are sufficient to make it
> the interest and duty of a wise people to discourage and restrain it.
>
> It serves always to distract the Public Councils, and enfeeble the
> Public Administration. It agitates the Community with ill-founded
> jealousies and false alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against
> another, foments occasionally riot and insurrection. It opens the door
> to foreign influence and corruption, which find a facilitated access
> to the government itself through the channels of party passions. Thus
> the policy and the will of one country are subjected to the policy and
> will of another.

Jefferson:

> I never submitted the whole system of my opinions to the creed of any
> party of men whatever, in religion, in philosophy, in politics, or in
> anything else, where I was capable of thinking for myself. Such an
> addiction is the last degradation of a free and moral agent. If I
> could not go to heaven but with a party, I would not go there at all.

[![justin.boden](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1023)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
justin.boden replied to [this comment from
paul.warren.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154953)
| [February 8, 2013
16:48](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155120)

**79:**

"In Aus, we have a choice between a quite obviously crazy right wing
Christian... and a reasonable well adjusted, annoyingly voiced,
relatively normal, not quite so right wing Prime Minister."

Forget the NBN & asylum seekers, why are you contrasting Abbott's "quite
obviously crazy" with Gillard's "annoyingly voiced"? You're obviously
pitting them both as irrational choices, and yet these personal
attributes you selected are not comparable. Why did you frame the
statement that way? (Protip: the answer is your internalized misogyny.
That is, you wouldn't bother to comment on a politician's voice except
that she's a woman and they're meant to look pretty and smell nice and
not have opinions, right?)

Australia has three broad social movements. The red centre, or the
isolationist, rural social conservatives who want to raise tariffs, peg
the AUD low and sell their produce for great profit. The middle &
upper-class business-folk, who want open trade, foreign investment and
minimal government regulation (including on social issues, because if
fake vomit is profitable then by damn they will manufacture fake vomit
and be damned government-enforced standards of decency). And, of course,
the socialist, unionized labor party which was the impetus for the two
aforementioned forces joining up to form their unwieldy Coalition party.

In recent years what we've seen is the Labor and Coalition both go for
the economically-liberal, socially-moderate mantle. This is what
squeezed the Democrats out of existence, and what forced so many
Nationalists (the red-centre folk) to go Independent just to spite the
Coalition. It's also what allowed the Greens to make gains where Labor
abandoned its socially-progressive, economically-restrictive values.
That is, the two major parties going centrist and ignoring two corners
of the triangle in their haste.

You can look at this as a choice between two bad options, but you're
ignoring the leverage of the minor parties and independents which, by
their success, will force the major parties back into their separate
corners. Australian politics don't really fit to the model Charlie is
describing.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
daniel.duffy20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155082)
| [February 8, 2013
16:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155124)

**80:**

Hmmm. While I hate to lift the sheeting over any project, I'm currently
working on a book that involves the end of World War 2, so I'm reading a
lot on that era.

And what you wrote isn't seem right at all.

Remember, Winston Churchill's Iron Curtain Speech was delivered on March
3, 1946, or seven months after the Pacific War ended and less than a
year after Germany surrendered. The cold war was settling in even before
Japan surrendered. Remember that fascism was originally presented as an
alternative to both communism AND capitalism. The Soviets fought with
the US and UK only because fascism was as much a threat to them as it
was to us. With the fascists out of the way, communists and capitalists
had no reason to stay friendly.

America wasn't a "world striding behemoth" until the 1990s, in that
decade between when the Soviet Union crumbled and China and India rose.

That's the genesis of the problem. We've still got the institutions of
the Cold War, and that includes all the Whatever-Industrial complexes
that grew up to fight the Cold War on our side.

These complexes are fighting for survival too.

They should have disappeared when the Cold War crashed, and instead
they've metastasized, and other industries are trying to reinvent
themselves using the same model.

That's one reason we've got the incompetent chimeras of the TSA and
Homeland Security in the US. Terrorists make a perfect bogie to replace
the Communist bloc as the enemy of our civilization. And one could argue
that the Iraq war ended up as an excuse for the MIC to make a lot of
money, and that we didn't get truly involved in Afghanistan until we
figured out how to make it profitable too. And we have--black ops and
drones are getting increasingly expensive, and we don't know where the
money's going any more, or whether they are still effective.
Silver-plated airplanes? It's for stealth, as in the Osprey. That sort
of thing.

I'd suggest that this is where we're having trouble: we have these giant
industrial complexes that know how to suck a lot of money out of the
government. Unfortunately, most of the stuff they produce (other than
salaries) doesn't go into the broader economy. For example Weapons are
the ultimate consumer items--use them up, and then someone might spend
money cleaning up thereafter. Ditto with prisons. A few people get rich,
a bunch of poor people (the guards) get living wages, and a lot of lives
get wasted to make it happen, all in the name of public security.

Does this sound familiar? I've seen a claim that the US has been
captured by four industrial complexes: military, financial, oil, and
medicine. Admittedly we all depend on oil and medicine, but anyone who
doesn't see the media war against alternatives to any of these isn't
paying attention.

And the -Complex meme is spreading. Here in California, I'm even seeing
the state fire fighters attempting this approach. They've got an
approach on the board to bulldoze and burn over 100,000 acres of
wildlands per year, all in the name of preventing fires. All state parks
are on the board for these treatments. They explicitly aren't paying
more than token attention to the environmental laws that want them to be
responsible, nor do they have any way of determining whether their
treatments have anything like the desired effect. It's primarily
designed as a money transfer to a few private contractors, using public
safety as the fig leaf. A fire-industrial complex? That's what people
are trying to set up.

Oddly enough, the way to fight against them isn't to rebel. To get rid
of these things, we need to just get into such a bad budget strait that
the government cuts them away to save itself. In this weird way, things
like the bizarre Washington sequester might actually work. Call it the
clown revolution.

Or not. We'll see.

[![edward.w.bear](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1971)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
edward.w.bear | [February 8, 2013
17:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155125)

**81:**

One other aspect about the corporate-government "symbiosis" you didn't
mention was the STAFFs of the legislators. They are the people who
really write the laws their purported masters pass. Consider the
following essay:

[http://dailyreckoning.com/revolving-zombies/](http://dailyreckoning.com/revolving-zombies/)

about just how certain aspects of Obamacare got passed and just who
engineered them.

[![https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawlrO9GpUyqVLXyu3Tq-rJS1HrwPlK16YJ0](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1970)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawlrO9GpUyqVLXyu3Tq-rJS1HrwPlK16YJ0
| [February 8, 2013
17:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155128)

**82:**

"nobody can quite articulate a coherent alternative"

I think this is where you get closest to the root cause of our failure
mode - one that's historically specific, and one that we can
\*conceivably\* act upon. Our societies have not discovered compelling
replacements for those exhausted reds and blues (sorry yellow, sorry
green, but No), so it's beige versus blank, until we do.

In sociologist speak, this puts us in a "pre-political" moment, where
social currents chop and change around until profoundly new unifying
dynamics can be articulated and groups of us can come together around
them in proper movements. The beige parties are zombie shells of
previous, real, political movements. They'll keep stumbling around
moaning and snapping at us until we can articulate coherent
alternatives.

But when we do, there's nothing inherent in representative systems
preventing us from reclaiming our world. Resist the urge to universalise
this moment - that's doing the zombies' work for them.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
| [February 8, 2013
17:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155135)

**83:**

justinboden @79 "Australian politics don't really fit to the model
Charlie is describing." What you are describing is a functional
multiparty system. Do you think it will ever stabilize into two big
deadlocked parties, and if not why not?

heteromeles @80\
 "most of the stuff they produce doesn't go into the broader economy."
But isn't that what Keynesian economics is all about? I remember in
Economics 101\
 about how Keynesianism was described, "it doesn't matter where the
government spending goes, it could go into a pit, it will stimulate the
economy."

[![Bob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1972)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Bob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1972)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155088)
| [February 8, 2013
17:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155139)

**84:**

Since he was my favorite professor, I feel obliged to say that Mancur
Olson was an economist not a sociologist. I agree that his books (The
Logic of Collective Action and The Rise and Decline of Nations) speak
directly to Mr. Stoss's comments.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155135)
| [February 8, 2013
17:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155145)

**85:**

Not exactly - the actual example was something about paying men to dig
holes and more men to fill them in afterwards. That at least guarantees
the unemployed some money to spend on goods and services, whereas fat
paycheques to modern capitalist organisations doesn't since the money
won't go to people who need it.\
 See also quantitative Easing.

The real issue is that you've got lots of things you could be spending
money on which would definitely feed it straight back into the economy,
but your politicians refuse to do so.

[![David
Karger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1975)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://people.csail.mit.edu/karger)
[David
Karger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1975)
| [February 8, 2013
17:37](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155146)

**86:**

My hypothesis is that we have gotten \*too good\* at politics. Back when
democracy was young, politicians used relatively naive strategies that
left them at the mercy of the electorate. But as democracy has matured,
there has been plenty of opportunity to discover all the tricks and
hacks that can help politicians take control \*despite\* the wishes of
the electorate. A couple examples include (i) the evolution of
incredibly sophisticated marketing methods that know exactly which
buttons to push for exactly which segment of the electorate and (ii)
ever-more sophisticated techniques for gerrymandering, (iii) a extensive
understanding of how to discourage participation in the democratic
process. Unfortunately, the knowledge of how to hack the democratic
system cannot be unlearned, so I'm pessimistic about any future
improvement.

[![afamiglietti](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1977)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
afamiglietti | [February 8, 2013
17:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155149)

**87:**

As a US citizen, the most terrifying piece of this analysis is the
observation (which for me, echoes some thought by David Graeber and
others) that the Tea Party is the only viable radical party currently
present. If the choice is between beige corporate technocrats and those
guys, paint me beige.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from
daniel.duffy20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155098)
| [February 8, 2013
17:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155150)

**88:**

Hmmm, Dosadi as a story would be somewhat easy to film, but perhaps the
mega themes involved put people off. It wouldn't be too hard to cut out
some of the unnecessary stuff, or re-write conversations so that they
explained things rather than hinted at them.\
 But then thinking about it, there's quite a lot of things told to teh
reader e.g. Gowachin unease at being out of water so long, or the
importance of certain postures and hand movements that would be hard to
get in a film but make the book much deeper.

But I think you're getting confused re. the Burea of Sabotage. It was
created not because of ossification of government but by its rapidity. I
think Herbert was wrong in that respect, or else he was showing more
obvious dictatorial leanings. I think the aim as it ended up being in
the books and story is more to prevent government turning into a
massive, overriding machine which crushes everyone under its wheels.\
 See also bureacracies etc. Mistakes and disagreements are human; making
a machine system in the name of efficiency and crushing dissent are more
what the BoS is about stopping.

The relationship of this to Charlies post is obvious.

The more subtle thing mentioned in the Dosadi Experiment which most
people don't see or comprehend is the Demopol. It isn't explained very
well in the book (Dosadi is not the most coherent book, it should be 50
pages longer) but the impression I have is that it is a method of
polling a 'representative' sample of the population to arrive at the
answers the ruling oligarchs want. Exactly how this method works is
unclear, I think it would include what they buy, what they spend money
on, media viewing, as well as questions about what issues they are
concerned about.

The modern equivalent is of course poll manipulation and the use of
focus groups. \
 For a fictional treatment involving the horror of a simulated town that
the politiians can experiment on to their hearts content and use to
steer and design policy without reference to the actual voting populace,
see "Red Men" by Matthew de Abaitua. As soon as I reached that point in
the story, I was like "Demopol!!!"

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from David
Karger](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155146)
| [February 8, 2013
18:09](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155151)

**89:**

I only partially agree.

Politics isn't just about winning elections, it's about running a group
of people.

We've gotten very good at gaming elections, but, frankly, Washington
(and many state capitols) are less good at actually doing the job of
running the country.

So we've had a lot of innovation in electioneering. Where we desperately
need more innovation is in the political process.

To be perfectly honest, innovation in the political process does get
dangerous: a dictator taking over a semi-functional democracy is
certainly an innovation, although it's not necessarily an improvement.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
| [February 8, 2013
18:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155152)

**90:**

I have to say I agree with Charlie's hypothesis but I'm not sure we have
an evolutionary escape. Vive la revolution!

I guess my hope for the UK, if we have to keep the current system, is
that the coalition disillusions one (well two actually) load of voters,
the memories of Blair and Brown remain to disillusion the other
mainstream, and we get relatively large votes for other parties. My
politics would prefer Greens to UKIP and so on, but a significant
disruption of the status quo and a radical overhaul of the system
following that. Parties that, unlike Cameron, don't have long, close
ties to the media and might castrate the newspapers so they start
holding politicians to account (good) and not trying to choose who gets
elected (bad).

And I would still like to see a system where we, the population, are
consulted as much as possible. We don't see the stupid faux dichotomies
"We're doing this for the best!" "We oppose you!" but we actually get to
see the situation, a range of choices and understand them. There are
very few problems I've met over the years where there are only two
possible approaches - and the ones that spring to mind like "Should we
invade Iraq, yes or no?" are lazy because they're not addressing the
actual problem, they're forcing the simplistic question.

We don't look at George Osborne (and lets face it, even most of the Tory
backbenchers are) and say "WTF are you doing with this policy that seems
blatantly not to be working?" we see if he's got any choices and we kick
him where it will do most good to get onto another track if there is one
available. Of course that will upset the special interests... all those
bankers he was at school with. But I can live with that.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
afamiglietti](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155149)
| [February 8, 2013
18:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155155)

**91:**

Your point about the Tea Party misses the fact that they got a lot of
their funding during the first Obama term from rich wingnuts -- these
folks have now closed the money taps, because they poured eight digit
sums into the machinery and got nothing except a pain in the wallet.

I'm more worried about UKIP, in the UK, who seem to be genuine populists
-- the Little Englander wing of the Conservative party in exile. When
(not if) Cameron goes down in flames, UKIP will be waiting in the wings.

[![anderson.ruben](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1978)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
anderson.ruben | [February 8, 2013
18:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155156)

**92:**

Plus one on comment number five. My mother also supports government by
lottery--she has been saying so for years.

Perhaps more threatening to the status quo is my idea of the Phone Book
Olympics--international sport by random selection.

[![aggray](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1330)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
aggray replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155155)
| [February 8, 2013
18:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155159)

**93:**

I think you're misjudging the Tea Party. From what I can tell it tapped
into real sentiment.

[![roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1599)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
roland.dobbins | [February 8, 2013
18:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155160)

**94:**

None of the issues you cite in your weblog post are new or unique or
unanticipated. Reading Machiavelli, Montesquieu, the Federalist Papers,
and de Tocqueville is a pre-requisite to having a sensible discussion on
these matters.

Democracy in particular is a particularly pernicious form of government,
for as soon as the hoi polloi figure out that they can vote themselves
largesse from the public treasury, the jig's up. Democracies inevitably
slide into tyranny and empire; ever since the United States begin its
slow devolution from a republic into a mere democracy, starting with the
direct election of US senators; continuing with the centralization
brought on by the Second World War; the so-called 'Great Society'; and
the current 'terrorism' nonsense, incompetent empire has become the
seemingly inevitable result for the USA.

There are various arguments for and against political parties in the
source documents cited above. Their main beneficial function is to keep
out most of the crazies.

Term limits are one way to help winnow out the professional political
class. Unfortunately, they haven't seen much in the way of adoption
beyond the two-term limit of the American President.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155160)
| [February 8, 2013
19:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155162)

**95:**

*as soon as the hoi polloi figure out that they can vote themselves
largesse from the public treasury, the jig's up.*

Cite, please. At least two examples of democracies where this has
happened.

I'd find it a lot more plausible if in place of "the hoi polloi" you'd
said "capital-intensive industries" and instead of "vote themselves"
you'd written "buy themselves votes for".

But frankly, all I hear from you right now is recycled Heinlein
wise-cracks and libertarian nostrums which don't actually correspond to
observable reality.

[![matthieu.walraet](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1979)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
matthieu.walraet | [February 8, 2013
19:15](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155163)

**96:**

All political systems are oligarchies of one form or another. Our
current democracies are still better than alternatives. Why does they
appear so wrong now ?

Are they more corrupt than 15 years ago or has our expectations grown
higher at a quicker pace than reality ?

My feeling is that representative democracy is still a good idea. I
agree that our political elite is between bad and mediocre. However, we,
the people, are the root cause for that. We are too dumb when we vote.
We listen for demagogic promises and ignore reasonable voices.

Maybe one day we will learn, get more clever, become more resistant to
memetic diseases. Democracy will become really effective then. \

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from
aggray](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155159)
| [February 8, 2013
19:15](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155164)

**97:**

Yes, the sentiment was real, leading to people burning themselves out
organising, but money was also funnelled in by rich people who wanted a
nice popular front campaigning against government spending. \

[![Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1774)
| [February 8, 2013
19:25](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155166)

**98:**

Various random notes:

The Teaparty is a "progress-party" in the same shape and mold as we have
seen them in Denmark, Norway, NL and other countries: Racist,
retronationalist skeptical of anything and everybody that threaten their
preconceived notions, and ready to discount tangible reality, if it
conflicts with same.

These parties are also one of the more credible arguments for the theory
that addition of lead to gasoline has been the most expensive mistake we
ever made in the western world.

Back to Charlies hypothesis:

One very big problem in the current western democratic systems is that
the lawmakers do not feel the burden of the volume of laws they enact,
and therefore laws accumulate.

It would be an interesting experiment to update a national constitution
with a bandwidth-limit on legislation.

One way would be in the form of a mandatory expiry of all laws: After 10
years they expire and must start the legislation track from scratch, no
shortcuts allowed.

My preferred model is based on the "rule" that a citizen can only be
held accountable to the law, if he has a chance to know what the law
says:

I would require that the member of parliament who propose a law, must
recite it correctly, in toto, from memory, in front of the assembly,
before the final vote can progress.

I'm sure that would do wonders for brevity and clarity in law-making.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155162)
| [February 8, 2013
19:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155167)

**99:**

Agreed. Since I live in a strongly term-limited state, I can say that
governance has largely decayed under the term limit system.

Problem is, big states are hugely complex. Just figuring out what goes
where takes years. If you've got, say, six years to organize the
campaign for your next job, you're not going to spend much effort doing
your present job.

Term limits breed simplistic solutions. Basically, you'll try your
party's orthodoxy, and if that doesn't work, move on to another job and
try the same strategy.

The other thing to remember is, if these problems were easily solvable,
they'd be solved already. While there are some stupid politicians out
there, most of them are pretty intelligent. Certainly smarter than
average.

It takes years of persistent effort to solve most big problems. Cutting
their effort short via term limits isn't smart.

[![stealthisbook](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1980)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
stealthisbook | [February 8, 2013
19:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155169)

**100:**

Despite the several pitches for term limits as a potential solution to
the pervasive Beige, I would advocate against them. Nearly two decades
ago, my state passed term limits for all non-federal elected offices.
They didn't work to combat the Beige. In fact, they exacerbated the
problem.

Short term incumbency left most of our higher elected officials sorely
lacking in expertise in handling state government. Lobbyists, party
officials, and long-term government employees run rings around the
electeds and in most cases simply dictate policy. The party structures
have expanded because individual candidates no longer have the
experience of running for a particular office and so they fall back on
the parties to develop strategy and message. Party unity is at an
all-time high.

The worst part is that we've managed to get some really stupid people
into office simply because they blend in with all of the other unknown,
cookie cutter candidates and are willing to back the party 100%. Some of
them even manage to rocket up the ladder since the opportunities for
higher office open up faster than it takes to find out that your
representative is a dingbat.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from
matthieu.walraet](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155163)
| [February 8, 2013
20:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155170)

**101:**

"we, the people, are the root cause for that. We are too dumb when we
vote"\
 There's only so much smart you can put into your vote because you have
to pick between two packages. Now, within a party, in candidate
selection, that may be true. Still, there are practicalities and trying
to get somebody who can win in the general election and function once in
office. Maybe the answer is branded "factions" within the parties, akin
to the tea party but more of them. More packages.

heteromeles@99\
 Maybe it takes a while for the term limits system to take effect. It's
like if you work for a demanding boss who watches what you do when you
finally get a day off. You lie around and watch TV. He says "why should
you have time off, all you do is waste it." But if you had MORE free
time, what would you do, once you were rested up. What I mean is, the
term limited legislators are ineffective at dealing with a system
designed to empower entrenched elites. What they do at first isn't
necessarily what they will always do. Like when you take over a new
office desk or something, you aren't very efficient until you rearrange
everything for your own way of doing things. Once they simplify the
system, arrange everything for their style, they may start doing things
right. Stick to simple laws that the executive branch bureaucrats
administer the details of under also term limited top executives. Like
the State Department is run by career diplomats who know how to do
things Hillary didn't understand in detail and Congress shouldn't think
of legislating in detail. (Won't you give? Save the bureaucrat!)

[![jackwilliambell](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1981)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jackwilliambell | [February 8, 2013
20:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155171)

**102:**

Charlie,

Funny, but even five years ago my response to this post would have been
surprise you had bothered: your point is so obvious one would think
there is no need to express it. (As well as you did express it.)

I'm no longer convinced this is the case. Yes, I'm in the choir. Yes I
know this sermon all too well. Hell, I've delivered [my own version of
it](http://www.jackwilliambell.com/?p=976) from
[time](http://www.jackwilliambell.com/?p=595) to
[time](http://www.jackwilliambell.com/?p=237). But the rest of your
audience is largely made up of those who actually believe their
political illusions are solid reality. These people need a constant drum
beat of stuff like this before they can break the rhythm of their
march;the political lockstep they find themselves in.

Even those outside the mainstream on these things are often blinkered by
their political affiliations to the point they cannot see the forest for
the trees. For example, someone mentioned David Brin earlier in the
comments. Brin does tend to be right about a lot of things, but he
embeds those nuggets of correctness in a matrix of dipshittyness so
dense one needs dynamite to work them loose. In the end he is just [a
right-wing version of John
Shirley](http://www.jackwilliambell.com/?p=1119), I.E. an intelligent
and socially aware SF writer with a decent understanding of politics and
a tendency to be right on the issues and wrong on the substance.

I find it fascinating the extent to which socialist Scottish SF writers
(including yourself, albeit a 'naturalized' one) tend to show such a
clarity of vision on this subject. Now *there* is a subject I would love
to see you write about...

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155170)
| [February 8, 2013
20:09](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155175)

**103:**

*Maybe it takes a while for the term limits system to take effect.*

Thought experiment: would you advocate term limits for jobs other than
"politician"?

How about MD? Would you like your GP to be limited to "eight years then
find another speciality"?

How about airline pilots?

Hell, how about paid novelists? Do you think I'd write better or faster
if I knew I only had an 8 year window in which I'd be allowed to profit
from my work?

Term limits on elected offices are the wrong answer to the problem of
elected officials "sticking". The correct solution is one that makes
gerrymandering impossible and punishes poor performers in office by
replacing them. (The problem, of course, is how you define "poor
performance".)\

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
matthieu.walraet](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155163)
| [February 8, 2013
20:27](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155179)

**104:**

*All political systems are oligarchies of one form or another. Our
current democracies are still better than alternatives. Why does they
appear so wrong now ?*

Because we've completely failed to solve global warming in time to
prevent serious consequences, and there's a damn new continent made of
discarded plastic adrift in the north Pacific, and we don't seem to be
making any progress in dealing with our environmental problems.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155175)
| [February 8, 2013
20:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155185)

**105:**

While I agree there's benefit to experience, I wonder if what we should
do is get rid of mass elections and instead have a smaller number of
weekly/monthly elections. When $\_CANDIDATE turns into $\_REPRESENTATIVE
they get a term (with, possibly some recall potential) of (say) 5 years.

But you undermine the party structure to some extent because you won't
get the almighty mandate for "a parliament" so we won't have parties
voting through barking policies and keeping going regardless - if
moderately large parties persist and they block vote in unpopular ways
they'll lose people when their next election comes around. I **suspect**
this will make our so-called representatives actually represent their
local electorate.

Traditionalists will throw their hands in the air and run round in
circles of course, asking how we'll ever get anything done, how you can
set plans. So some extent you can't, not in the current way anyway. But
there are options like discussion, compromise and the like. And since we
have semi-annual budgets, pre-budgets and so on, we just formalise that
as part of the process, along with other things, so the big issues get
thrashed out and discussed regularly to keep us ticking along.

Would we stay beige? Maybe. But I think we'd see a shifting pattern of
smaller alliances rather than true parties, which might derail the
failure mode. And I rather more sure we'd see far fewer safe seats and a
move to actually elect people who do a good job.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155175)
| [February 8, 2013
20:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155186)

**106:**

Sure, government is complex, as are many of the problems it faces, and
this requires expertise like Doctors and Pilots. But my thinking was
that the expertise would be provided by expert career functionaries
based on direction by big picture legislators akin to short term high
level appointees. They would just, for example, create a Minister of the
Environment and vote in some vague mandates and powers that the MOTE
would then run with. In theory.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
| [February 8, 2013
20:58](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155187)

**107:**

Surely the question though is, does you really have to do the modern
political recruitment method as outlined above, to become a good
representative?\
 I think it obvious that the answer is no, of course not. But it is the
way to go if you want to be a good politician, which may or may not
involve actually doing good for your country and its citizens.

\
 This is also related to the Staffordshire hospital disaster -
manaterialism in services as a result of the politicians not being here
to serve but to manage. Everything becomes an issue of how best to
manage it, rather than how to get the actual outcomes the public desire.

[![slamble](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1435)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
slamble replied to [this comment from
paul.warren.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154953)
| [February 8, 2013
21:09](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155188)

**108:**

Nitpick: Not Mr Packer. Kerry passed away a few years ago; James sold
off his media stake and got into casinos instead.

As for the rest, justinboden @79 said it better than I could.

RDSouth @ 83: I don't see the Australian system sliding into the two
party hole that the US is in, for one simple reason: our polling system.
I won't go into the details of the Australian Senate's system; it's too
complicated to explain quickly here (but suffice to say, it *encourages*
a high diversity in parties and opinions, which means the fringe
elements are more likely to have a small showing.) The House of
Representatives, which is what defines a group as being "in power", is
elected by instant runoff voting: we number **all** of the candidates
(not some - all) in order. If one has an outright majority, s/he gets
in. If not, the candidate with the lowest number of votes is eliminated,
and his/her votes are redistributed to the second preference (for each
ballot paper.)

This means that the issue of "voting for the party most likely to get in
that I dislike the least" *doesn't happen here* - because a vote for
somebody who *can't* get in doesn't get thrown away.

It isn't ideal - there are times when I look at the list of parties and
think, "Dear $DEITY, who the hell do I want to put last; they're all
appalling!" - but it's far, far, far better than the first-past-the-post
system the US uses.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155170)
| [February 8, 2013
21:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155189)

**109:**

No. Term limits had a fairly swift negative effect, and produced no
obvious up-tick.

I live in California. A couple of elections ago, they tinkered with the
term limits (via California's infamous public initiative system--also a
bad idea), and oddly, possibly coincidentally, we're now getting
positive action for the first time in years.

While we did get some notably corrupt actors prior to term limits, some
of those corrupt players also had notably positive impacts on the state
(I'm thinking of Willie Brown here, in case you're wondering).

California's fundamental problem is that distrust of Sacramento
politicians was built into our political system back in 1911, and term
limits is part and parcel of the same distrust. We like to think our
politicians either are crooks or will be corrupted, and therefore the
public needs to be able to over-ride them at will.

While I like checks and balances, treating everyone as a crook is, I
think, a bad idea. Oddly, it doesn't automatically make everyone into a
crook. However, it hasn't notably slowed corruption, so it hasn't solved
the major problem it was intended to solve.

Term limits did have one result that was obvious in hind-sight: the
lobbyists and consultants know much more about the issues than the
politicians do, because they worked on the issue far longer than the
pols did. So do some of the bureaucrats. This disempowers the
politicians to an unhealthy degree, because they have to decide out of
ignorance on issues that are full of complexities.

Most environmental issues take decades to sort out, due largely to the
politics around them. The people who prosecute these efforts aren't the
politicians any more, although they used to be. Now, they're
corporations, consultants, lobbyists, and activists. While this is a
form of participatory democracy, I tend to think that having our elected
representatives participate too is a good thing overall.

[![CharlerK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1905)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[CharlerK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1905)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155175)
| [February 8, 2013
21:17](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155191)

**110:**

Charlie,

I think I must have misunderstood you. I thought you were saying one of
the problems is that politics has become a profession. Would term limits
not help with that? I would think if every member of a party knows they
will not be in office for very long they would care less about
re-election. The imperative of the party to survive would be, to some
extent, countered by the desire of the elected membership to do
something during their relatively brief tenure.

I can see you disagree with that and I'd love to hear more.

[![FatBigot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1984)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[FatBigot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1984)
| [February 8, 2013
21:20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155192)

**111:**

I think that any serious discussion of this problem has to take account
of what happens when democracy really fails. Professor Matthew Flinders
(http://www.shef.ac.uk/politics/staff/matthewflinders) was attached to
the UK embassy when he saw the riots between Thailand's reds and
yellows. People were having limbs hacked off on the basis of the tee
shirt they were wearing. And then dying because there is no health
service in that country.

This has given him a strong desire to retain and strengthen democracy. I
strongly recommend his writings on the subject. One of the points he
makes is that politics is such a scrutinized area, and is made so
unpleasant by the media that no normal person would want to enter it.

Obviously, UK politicians have not been the best of the bunch (why
didn't any go to prison when they signed an expense claim that "These
expenses were wholly, necessarily and exclusively for my parliamentary
business"?) and are self serving with their demands for more pay.

One other point is that these days voluntary groups in general are
finding it harder to recruit active members. This means that the pool
from which to select candidates shrinks even further.

[![h4nd](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1985)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[h4nd](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1985)
| [February 8, 2013
21:27](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155198)

**112:**

Yeah, representative democracy. Roman style? An earlier alternative was
direct democracy, Greek style, where citizens (at the time, land owning
free men, I think?) voted on the ISSUES, not on the society of lizards
(Adams) who would bend said issues to their personal gain.

Of course, when groups of people vote directly on issues that affect
them, you get more uninformed voting etc, but perhaps that's less
distortion of interest than having goup A (politicans) vote on policy
for group B (workers, business, unemployed, child rearers, children).

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155186)
| [February 8, 2013
21:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155199)

**113:**

*my thinking was that the expertise would be provided by expert career
functionaries based on direction by big picture legislators akin to
short term high level appointees.*

We have that in the UK.

Unfortunately, we also have institutions like the Home Office, which
develop their own agenda and policies and then brain-control whichever
hapless minion is parachuted in to run them. (See also "Yes, Minister"
for a hysterically funny fictional depiction of this process.)

[![gravelbelly22](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1242)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
gravelbelly22 replied to [this comment from
darwinev0lved](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154996)
| [February 8, 2013
21:31](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155200)

**114:**

*No doubt part (and only part) of the move to the centre of the Labour
party is due to the breaking of and breaking with the unions – which did
use to offer a genuine alternative path in to politics that the one you
describe.*

...until the unions themselves fell victim to the problems described.
Closed shops; Arthur Scargill insisting that the remnant of the NUM
should continue to provide him with rent-free luxury accommodation;
union leaders blowing the Gini coefficient out of the water; the
creation of a professional union employee (much like professional
politicians - why bother with a proper job, just get into the hierarchy
pronto...)

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
| [February 8, 2013
21:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155201)

**115:**

**In other news**, [A monarchist strikes
back](http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.co.uk/2013/02/charles-stross-discovers-cathedral.html).
Provocative and worth reading to the end.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
CharlerK](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155191)
| [February 8, 2013
21:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155202)

**116:**

*I thought you were saying one of the problems is that politics has
become a profession. Would term limits not help with that?*

Politics has become a profession, but term limits are the wrong answer
-- all they result in is a revolving door between the legislature and
lobbying firms.

The real question that needs answering in my view is *why* has politics
become a profession, and how can we open it up so that a wider range of
views are represented. (Of course, [some folks
disagree](http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.co.uk/2013/02/charles-stross-discovers-cathedral.html).)

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1963)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1963)
| [February 8, 2013
22:06](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155208)

**117:**

I'm not sure why you say "democracy is broken". It doesn't seem to be
any more broken today than it was 50 years ago. In some respects things
are better than they ever were.

People live longer and have a better quality of life than they ever did
historically. I think your filter bubble and lack of long term
perspective are the problem.

Given the large media companies are dying I don't see how the "failure
mode" we're in is stable in any case.

[![kedwards.author](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1045)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
kedwards.author | [February 8, 2013
22:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155209)

**118:**

*...They concede that the opposition may disagree with the party in
power on precisely how the state must operate, but agree that it should
operate...*

Except if you live in the US, where the only alternative to the Beige
Dictatorship is the Tea Party, who have decided that the state
*shouldn't* operate and have spent the last 4 years attempting to monkey
wrench the government as much and as often as possible.

This is the fourth item on that menu: Chicken Kiev, Chicken Chasseur,
Chicken Korma, or Chicken Shit.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
| [February 8, 2013
22:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155210)

**119:**

A logical conclusion from ASuffield's post is that we need shorter
working hours so that people have more spare time and energy. This would
also have the added benefit of freeing up more time and effort for
volunteer organisations and suchlike. (More important the more the
condems cut welfare)

I can't see any downsides to it, but I'm sure the companies can find
some. A tired workforce with anaesthetic tv is a docile workforce. Keep
them slaving at 50 or 60 hour weeks and they don't have time to object,
especially in an atomised society.

But then you have trouble organising the voluntary workers who are
supposed to take over the work the state was doing, as you hack it all
to pieces in the name of austerity... Wait, was I expecting conservatism
as practised by politicians to make sense?

[![strummist](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1130)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
strummist replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155201)
| [February 8, 2013
22:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155212)

**120:**

I'm not clear what he's on about but he really means it and has written
with style and immediacy. I've bookmarked the post so I can read it
while less drunk. I suspect he has made a category error distinguishing
between 'public opinion' and 'informed opinion' but I'm not sure. In any
case if I were a politician I'd want him writing speeches for me.

[![Dave\_the\_Proc](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1620)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Dave\_the\_Proc](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1620)
replied to [this comment from
strummist](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155212)
| [February 8, 2013
22:37](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155216)

**121:**

He does rather undercut the serious points in his long and detailed
rebuttal by opening with some back handed compliments of Charlie's
writing, and something of a mild ad hominem. It does leave the rest of
the article smelling slightly of sour grapes
I-could-have-been-a-novelist-too sentiment.

[![Dave
Berry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1258)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Dave
Berry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1258)
replied to [this comment from
asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154980)
| [February 8, 2013
22:40](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155217)

**122:**

I'm glad you wrote this reply because it captures many of my doubts
about Charlie's post. You also add more points and to cap it all you
write with the experience of someone within the system.

To other posters on this thread, I'd be interested to read your
responses to this "inside view".

[![kedwards.author](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1045)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
kedwards.author replied to [this comment from Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154940)
| [February 8, 2013
22:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155218)

**123:**

*Pick eligble citizens to parliament using a scientifically backed
randomized method.*

Problem is, someone who looks good on paper (and to a scientifically
backed method) could be a real narcissistic chump IRL. Look at Academia
as a model: it's full of people whose credentials paint them as a group
of smart, accomplished individuals but put them in a room together on a
committee and it turns into an exercise in passive aggressive tyranny
and petty ego-boosting. Now give them triggers to nuclear devices and an
army of robot drone assassins...

[![Dave](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1987)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/dTOuDKAWtYWvsaRK4s2SwVikRE_gWk95D1f7#67cb0)
[Dave](https://me.yahoo.com/a/dTOuDKAWtYWvsaRK4s2SwVikRE_gWk95D1f7#67cb0 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/dTOuDKAWtYWvsaRK4s2SwVikRE_gWk95D1f7#67cb0")
| [February 8, 2013
23:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155225)

**124:**

If you people are going to get into Moldbug you might as well resign
yourself to giving in to 100 hours of fun but ultimately useless time
going through his whole site and supporting material. Of course in the
end you will probably end up hating him, because you are biege.

[![romeostevensit](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1988)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
romeostevensit | [February 8, 2013
23:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155226)

**125:**

You approach the issue and back away at the last moment, likely due to
horror. I don't blame you. But I can't help but needle you in the hope
of getting you to look at it, even if you can only do it with a sideways
glance through slitted eyes.

Political decisions do, in fact, track the median voter's preferences
fairly well. Everything is working correctly.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155199)
| [February 8, 2013
23:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155228)

**126:**

On a slight tangent, thinking about the US, I wonder if one reason the
US House of Representatives has so much trouble is that, with 435
members, it's deep into the Dunbar Number hole between 150 and 500, too
large to organize as a band and too small to organize as a tribe? If so,
the logical answer for the US might be to increase the number of
congressmen by 100 or so, and let more parties join. The reason I put in
the second statement is that the parties within Congress are also big
enough to be into intermediate Dunbar misery.

Now, if you believe this theory, the UK Parliament should (as a body) be
safely into the Dunbar number for a tribe, and therefore should function
better than the US Congress. However, the UK parties within the
Parliament might be too big to operate harmoniously. Does this
prediction accord with observations?

Actually, the nice thing about this idea is that it's subject to easy
disproof. All we need to do is find enough well-run legislatures of
200-400 members, and enough badly run legislatures of 500 members, and
we can throw out an argument based on Dunbar numbers.

A good case in point is the US Senate, for that matter. It has only 100
members, so it should operate better. Somehow, it hasn't managed that
trick. Hmmmm.

[![strummist](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1130)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
strummist | [February 8, 2013
23:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155229)

**127:**

I honesty don't want to derail the conversation - not that anyone would
let me - but I'd love to take the rare opportunity to have a more
general political discussion with an active member of the Liberal
Democrats.

Keeping it on the topic, (but UK-centric) what's the role of the Third
Party (as a working definition, not a fate or dismissal)? As an
instinctive socialist, an Orwellian "Tory Anarchist", I don't really
feel I have a party. The best I can hope is that the Labour Party, when
in power, chuck as much money at science & technology as possible, and
try not to lock too many people up - that the Conservatives, when in
power, don't sell and smash everything.

I see the OP, the original problem - the "grey men" and women who one
hopes are only like that when in the public eye.

The Third Party, whoever it may be at the time, should, I hope, have
more room for people who are a bit more individual - who aren't doing
politics like they're reading it out of a franchise binder, with special
inserts for x particular ministerial job.

Being a "character" can be a trap in itself, but I hope that any third
party has plenty of room for people such as the late lamented David
Penhaligon - someone who would always try to do the right thing, to make
a moral choice, as it seemed to them. I'd trust a government - of any
party - if was composed of men and women with his integrity - with as
much connection and loyalty to their constituency as to the country.
That's a high standard, but that's the luxury of being the third party -
you can set your heels deeper, and your sights higher.

Finally, I know you meant well, that there probably wasn't an
alternative, but Jesus, can't you hold back these Tory scum a bit more,
just for a couple more years? Please?

[![strummist](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1130)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
strummist | [February 8, 2013
23:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155232)

**128:**

My previous comment held for moderation. I'm not sorry it was a bit of a
ramble. tl;dr - the Third Party, whoever that is in any context - has an
opportunity to dig it's heels in deeper, and set it's sights higher. Any
third party with a broad enough left-right intake has room for a serious
concentration of dissent in any clime. Is this reflected in reality?

[![Moderator
Alan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=603)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Moderator
Alan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=603)
replied to [this comment from
strummist](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155232)
| [February 9, 2013
00:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155233)

**129:**

The automatic filters have been working overtime for some reason on the
comments on this entry. I don't know why, but about 10% seem to have
been held.

As of now, they've all been reinstated.

I expect more will get caught.

[![hugo.fisher](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1171)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
hugo.fisher | [February 9, 2013
00:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155234)

**130:**

My thoughts? White male complaining that the government isn't doing what
he thinks it should?

"The news cycle is dominated by large media organizations and the
interests of the corporate sector." Yeah, you'd never see a science
fiction writer with a popular blog but no establishment connections
being invited to speak at a new government funded research centre for
copyright and new business models. Oh, wait.

"peaceful protesters being pepper-sprayed, tased, or even killed" That
never happened to, for example, the suffragettes before WW1. Oh, wait.

"police spying on political dissidents becoming normal" Coal miners
presumably aren't normal. Neither are anti nuke protestors.

And most aggravating of all

"Occasionally cultural shifts take place: over decades, they sometimes
reach a level of popular consensus that, when not opposed by corporate
stakeholders, leads to actual change"

I read this as saying that feminists, blacks, gays who joined poliitcal
parties and campaigned and stood for election and made speeches once
elected didn't accomplish anything.

Representative democracy as practised in the UK, US, Australia \*is\*
the fricking popular consensus.

\

[![strummist](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1130)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
strummist replied to [this comment from Moderator
Alan](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155233)
| [February 9, 2013
00:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155240)

**131:**

Years of no writing but terse fault reports & brief emails have left me
with less grammatical skills and worse punctuation use than a modern
spambot. Such is progress.

[![Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)
replied to [this comment from
hugo.fisher](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155234)
| [February 9, 2013
00:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155241)

**132:**

Everyone, no frothing rant replies, please. Feel free to correct each
other, but sarcasm doesn't always carry well, and citations are always
better than declarations of truth.

[![Charles
H](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=977)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Charles
H](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=977)
replied to [this comment from
mas.gramondou](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154952)
| [February 9, 2013
00:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155242)

**133:**

That's not quite correct, though close. A smaller government can be
supported \*if\* it's a government that yields more control to those
deciding policy. (Even in that case, though, it's one of the rarer modes
of action.)

To me the central tendency appears to be yielding more control to those
who currently hold power. (This almost always means "and also their
successors".) These are people who have a goal that they wish to
accomplish, and they are willing to adopt what they see as reasonable
changes to enhance the probability of their acheiving that goal. (Note
that I said enhance. It's it's a wildly improbable goal they will still
not be likely to accomplish it, at any rate in any useful manner, but
the enhancement of power that they have bestowed upond the office will
continue.) This is a positive feedback system with friction. The
friction is a delaying force, but not one that is likely to return the
system to it's previous state.\

[![napadvocacy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1957)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[napadvocacy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1957)
replied to [this comment from
cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155028)
| [February 9, 2013
00:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155243)

**134:**

That doesn't bear on anything that I said. American slavery was endorsed
by its democratically adopted Constitution. The US government has spied
on its citizens since at least the Civil War, if not since the Salem
witch trials. God knows the UK's government has spied on its own
citizens for bloody centuries now. I'm pretty sure even Aethelred the
Unready spied on his freaking subjects. None of this is new.

Democracy creates problems, yes. But it also solves them. Look at how
far the world has come in eradicating disease, hunger, and poverty (I
know it's not perfect, but just read up on how much of the UN Millenium
Development Goals were achieved years ahead of time).

Sometimes those solutions in turn create new problems. And then
democracy tries to solve those. And on and on and on. For example, drugs
ruined many American communities in the 60s and 70s. So we started the
Drug War. Turns out that solution was worse than the problem it
purported to fix, creating the highest rate of incarceration in the
world. So now we've got people pushing for legalization. But if adopted
that will undoubtedly lead to greater access to drugs and therefore to
higher addiction rates. So we'll create treatment programs, and then
maybe finally solve the problem.

Until one day, suddenly there's no room in the budget for treatment and
we abolish the programs. Communities start to fall apart again and we've
come full circle. Democracy, government, and human life in general
rarely provide conclusive answers or solutions. Things come in cycles;
history ebbs and flows. Democracy is unstable, that's what makes it
adaptive and effective. Today, maybe we're killing people
extra-judicially with drones. But at least we stopped torturing. At
least we stopped legally discriminating against women and minorities. At
least we require people to be convicted for crimes beyond a reasonable
doubt. Progress, man's distinctive mark alone etc.

So yeah, get mad about drones, torture, indefinite detention. You
absolutely should. But don't confuse the existence of flaws in the
democratic government of the moment for systemic failure, whether
hidden, explosive, creeping, or otherwise. No system is perfect, but at
least democracies for the most part are trying to get better. And the
fact that we're getting angry and raising alarms about all this evil
crap that our governments are pulling is the surest evidence of that.

[![Charles
H](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=977)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Charles
H](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=977)
replied to [this comment from Charles
H](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155242)
| [February 9, 2013
00:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155245)

**135:**

P.S.: The only reasonable alternative that has occurred to me is the
randomized choice of officials that was mentioned earlier. But do note
the importance of diluting the power of any one official in such a
system. Some of the random choices will be "real winners".

Also remember Aesop's fable about the Frogs who wanted a King. And in a
similar vein the warnings of the prophet Samuel before he chose Saul as
King of the Jews. Centralized power is inherently both corrupting and
dangerous, largely because there aren't any expected consequences that
are dangerous to those weilding the power.

[![Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.krazykimchi.com)
[Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)
| [February 9, 2013
01:15](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155248)

**136:**

Count me along the folks who see the beige politicos as a feature not a
bug, we're already slated for life in interesting times this century
without adding Great Leaders to the mix.

The overton windows are shifting in the right direction along most of
the axis I care about, and surprisingly fast in some cases. Just how
fast do we want world culture to change anyway? Do we really want a
global society that can spin on a dime? I haven't hit 40 yet but already
20 years seems like a relatively short time to me.

As for fixing the system, I wouldn't even consider it. I'd like to see
it all replaced seamlessly by more efficient alternatives that creep up
on it unnoticed. Roll out some post scarcity tech that'll do to the
world economy what skype has done to international phone calls (Sure,
that corpse is still walking, but it just had a lot of momentum).

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
hugo.fisher](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155234)
| [February 9, 2013
01:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155249)

**137:**

I think one of the determinants of people's views on this issue is how
they think about the environment. As I noted back in \#104, I consider
the environmental news very worrying, and think that our apparent
inability to respond to the problems on anything like the necessary
scale is something our descendants will dearly regret.

If, on the other hand, you think that environmental concerns are
overblown, then the present situation seems fairly good, and
significantly better than most past situations.

P.S. My browser crashed the first time I tried to post this. My
apologies if it winds up accidentally duplicated.

[![Dave](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1987)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/dTOuDKAWtYWvsaRK4s2SwVikRE_gWk95D1f7#67cb0)
[Dave](https://me.yahoo.com/a/dTOuDKAWtYWvsaRK4s2SwVikRE_gWk95D1f7#67cb0 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/dTOuDKAWtYWvsaRK4s2SwVikRE_gWk95D1f7#67cb0")
| [February 9, 2013
01:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155254)

**138:**

One quick way of determining if you are part of the "establishment" is
whether you use the term "we" when describing government policy. We
should do X. We shouldn't do Y. If you are using the term we then your
subconscious doesn't believe your posturing against the status quo.

People who don't like the status quo say things like, "they did that."
Those people out in Washington should do X or stop Y. The status quo
isn't something they participate in (even if they vote), its something
they endure.

[![TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)
| [February 9, 2013
02:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155277)

**139:**

@5:\
 Pick eligble citizens to parliament using a scientifically backed
randomized method.

---

I've been advocating that semi-seriously for a couple of decades now.
Pick a [whatever citizen ID number your country uses] via the Powerball
Lottery method; your number comes up, you take the next available
political office.

Objectors often say, "what if incompetent or evil people were then put
into office?"

My usual reply is, "how could we tell?"

[![TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)
| [February 9, 2013
02:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155284)

**140:**

I'd like to toss Joan D. Vinge's "Outcasts of the Heaven Belt" into the
mix. Written in 1982, one of its background threads was the operation of
a truly democratic society, implemented via a real-time, high-bandwidth
computerized information and voting system. Voting was done pretty much
continuously, on anything and everything, with the process also serving
as news and entertainment for its participants.

Since it was secondary to the story Vinge didn't develop it extensively,
but the first thought that came to my mind was, "Exactly how much
democracy do I want, anyway?"

Politicans and functionaries would need some level of "empowerment" to
avoid clogging the system with trivia; I don't necessarily want to have
to make an informed vote on whether Animal Control needs new equipment,
or parsing a 5,000 page bill on financing a foreign war... what I want
is a way to empower people whose informed opinions would agree with
mine, if I cared enough to form an opinion.

[![zhochaka](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=953)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
zhochaka | [February 9, 2013
02:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155287)

**141:**

One thing I have seen in recent British political history is a pattern
of prolonged Government by one party. The Conservative Party from 1979
to 1997. The Labour Party from 1997 to 2010.

In each case, the Opposition parties lost most of their experienced
politicians to age and retirement.

This is effectively a single-party state. If the mutual beigeness was a
big problem, the party in government would lose more elections. But the
tendency for the opposition to be more like the government, or perhaps
less unlike it, is going to make elections like Monty Python episodes:
not their Election Night Special, but the Spam sketch.

[![TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)
| [February 9, 2013
03:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155291)

**142:**

@70:\
 Dosadi... movie\
 ---\
 I'd wondered that about "Whipping Star," and spent some time writing my
version of a screenplay for it some years ago. With modern CGI and/or
animatronics it wouldn't be difficult to film the events.

The main problem I ran into was that the backstory wasn't really
amenable to conversion to dialog. That led to the same problem as the
movie of "Dune." The "movie experience" of those who had read the
book(s) vs. someone who only saw the movie would be much different.
There was just way too much backstory to fit into a film that long.
Fortunately, few viewers seem to expect a movie to actually make sense,
so it didn't matter.

[![roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1599)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
roland.dobbins replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155162)
| [February 9, 2013
03:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155293)

**143:**

\1. The UK over the last 50 years.

\2. The USA over the last 50 years, as it's devolved from a republic
into a mere democracy.

I'm giving up discussing political topics with you, because you've
demonstrated that you're simply not a serious person in this regard,
that you're stunningly ignorant of large swathes of the history of
political development over the last five thousand or so years (the post
to which this is a comment proves that), and that your devotion to your
childhood religion of vague leftism has so distorted your worldview that
you view anyone of rightist/conservative leanings as being stupid,
narrow-minded, evil, what-have-you.

I'm shocked that you didn't actually condemn Mencius Moldbug. My guess
is that you secretly believe him to be a sort of fanatically devoted
Internet uber-troll.

Here's a hint - he isn't. Another hint is that people who disagree with
your vaguely leftist views aren't all stupid, or evil, or both. Perhaps
with age, your unwarranted arrogance in this regard will dissipate - but
I doubt it, since you're already old enough to know better, yet you
don't.

For the record, I'm not a libertartian, I'm an American
paleoconservative. I don't think the Mexican War nor the War Between the
States were a good idea, much less the Great War, the Second World War,
the Balkan war, or either Mesopotamian Expedition. While I certainly
prefer libertarians to leftists of any stripe, they certainly aren't my
first choice.

I'm sure you'll 'red card' me, now, which is of course your right on
your own weblog. But remember that it's you who set the tone with your
'libertarian nostrums' & 'recycled Heinlein wisecracks', not me.

[![TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)
| [February 9, 2013
03:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155299)

**144:**

@103:\
 Thought experiment: would you advocate term limits for jobs other than
"politician"?\
 ---\
 The size of the legislature is fixed or regulated by stature, and
there's generally only one chief executive.

You can choose your MD of plumber from a large pool, but you're stuck
with what other people think you need for a Minister of Roads or a
President. You don't get a personal choice until you have the
opportunity to vote for someone else... and you might not get your
choice.

[![FuroidoG](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1991)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/.Ur1YQ4fs9gZUyGAN9wnGZvTpU8-#fc0c0)
[FuroidoG](https://me.yahoo.com/a/.Ur1YQ4fs9gZUyGAN9wnGZvTpU8-#fc0c0 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/.Ur1YQ4fs9gZUyGAN9wnGZvTpU8-#fc0c0")
| [February 9, 2013
04:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155324)

**145:**

Modest proposal for adding a check and balance to the beige, in the US
system at least:

Create a third house in the legislature. Populate it equivalent to the
House of Reps from state jury pools. (And like jury duty, impose an
appropriate series of penalties re: mandatory attendance, but maybe cut
the term down to like a year with a year's warning so people can make
arrangements. As a political entity, they'll pretty quickly vote
themselves the amenities - how about a pension? - to make sequestration
more of a lottery win than a gigantic pain in the ass.)

Let things pass on the vote of 2 out of 3 houses. Chop things up so an
appropriate balance of cooperation is or isn't required to get things
done.

Here's the thing: With a straight lottery draft system, the 'winners'
are easily corrupted - hey, once in a lifetime chance, take all the
influence and gladhanding you can before your times up! Politicians are
professionals at that game, so keeping them as a class means they'll be
very good at calling out corruption in the 'draft winners,' particularly
if it goes against their own interests. Meanwhile, the short-term draft
winners aren't going to be as willing overall to look the other way at
stupidity 'as a favor' to preserve their own chances at pushing
legislation the way the careerists are.

Meanwhile, it'll push a sampling of constituents into the political
media theater - the careerists will be forced to acknowledge the third
house and negotiate with it in relation to their policy stances - and
some of the draftees might prove popular or effective enough to be
encouraged to run for elected, rather than forced, office later
(probably 'adopted' by parties or equivalent machinery, but at least
that'd expand the selection pool from beyond groomed lizard-people).

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155160)
| [February 9, 2013
05:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155342)

**146:**

*Democracy in particular is a particularly pernicious form of
government, for as soon as the hoi polloi figure out that they can vote
themselves largesse from the public treasury, the jig's up.*

Democracies aren't the only governments that have problems with
overspending to keep their citizens quiescent. IIRC, at the time of his
death, Louis XVI had spent his expected tax receipts for the next seven
years. The Arab regimes have been doing this for decades, but the game
is winding down as oil revenues decline.

Secondly, the US government owes trillions of dollars, but is greatly
helped by the fact that the US government is the sole arbiter of what a
"dollar" is. It's very difficult to go broke in your own fiat currency.
Yes, printing money would be inflationary, but if I had to choose
between inflation or debt deflation I'd choose inflation every time.

[![tetron.interreality](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1992)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
tetron.interreality | [February 9, 2013
05:09](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155349)

**147:**

Political parties, like most large institutions, are often able to avoid
accountability because blame for collective failure doesn't necessarily
translate to individual representatives. While we can't eliminate
parties in a system where freedom of speech and assembly are
constitutional rights, we could at least remove some of the
institutional support they currently enjoy in the electoral system.
Elections should be non-partisan, and not list candidate's party
affiliation on the ballot. If a voter doesn't know who the candidates
are, voting merely based on party is unlikely to produce a better
outcome. Similarly, there should be a single primary with all candidates
and the top two candidates go onto the general election (and/or use a
system such as IRV).\

[![fatal.error](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1585)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
fatal.error | [February 9, 2013
05:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155373)

**148:**

On the one hand the post is so obvious as to not bear repeating

On the other hand, it's only as true as we let it be.

Life is funny that way

In general representative democracy is kinda old fashioned at this point
anyway technology is plenty capable of implementing straight out
democracy

[![scentofviolets](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-46-100x100.png)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/livejournal_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=46)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/livejournal_logo.png)](http://scentofviolets.livejournal.com/)
[scentofviolets](http://scentofviolets.livejournal.com/ "http://scentofviolets.livejournal.com/")
| [February 9, 2013
06:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155384)

**149:**

Maybe a dumb question here, certainly a general one: How do you evaluate
job performance?

[![Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)
replied to [this comment from
roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155293)
| [February 9, 2013
06:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155408)

**150:**

You can stop that any time you like. Please do so sooner.

Everyone else, again, please don't feed the trolls.\

[![Dave\_the\_Proc](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1620)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Dave\_the\_Proc](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1620)
replied to [this comment from Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155408)
| [February 9, 2013
07:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155433)

**151:**

I do rather enjoy those posts when someone says: "You are an idiot and I
refuse to spend any more time discussing this with you, now here's my
big long explanation of why I won't discuss it further."

[![nettie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1994)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[nettie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1994)
| [February 9, 2013
08:31](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155455)

**152:**

I find it interesting how many comments suggest that a randomized
sampling of people from the population would be make a better
representational democracy. Wouldn't that just move the career
politicians out one level? It's not like there wouldn't be political
organizations still running the long term politics, which means you
would end up with the exact same set of problems as are currently found,
if the self preservation mechanisms of the organizations are indeed a
large reason for beige politics. The only difference is that it would be
easier to find the loose cannon on the inside layer, at least until the
next set of people are randomly picked to represent the population. But
there would still be the same heterogeneity in the occupants of the
second layer (the more permanent political layer), so I really don't
think there would be any real difference.

I'm really not sure there is any form of representation that would not
eventually lead to beige politics, since forming organizations is so
fundamental to trying to represent a large number of people in any way
that allows long term planning.

A second note: For the comments about revolution being the solution to
beige politics, at least in cycles--What makes you think that the result
of a revolution would be another representative democracy? A military
state or dictatorship seems just as likely if not more so. And if you're
talking about a revolution within the system I think you're deluding
yourselves if you think anything would be different by the second
election after a change in leadership. The long term interests that
shape the beige politics (corporate interests) would stay the exact same
and the new parties could not survive more than an election or two
before being turned back into the same system.

Realistically the beige policies themselves (especially fiscal and
possibly environmental ones) are more likely to cause collapse at some
point that will result in something a lot bigger than a revolution
within the system. And that's not likely to be another representative
democracy. As seen by the cyclical flip between parties within our
current system, we as humans tend to flip to a different set of policies
if the current ones seem to be going bad, and if we reach anything near
a point of collapse that would be bad enough to provoke a flip away from
democracy completely. To what is the scary question. Most likely some
form of dictatorship, based on Rome.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from
scentofviolets](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155384)
| [February 9, 2013
08:33](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155457)

**153:**

Seriously?

The general answer is a negotitated series of measurable targets over a
timeframe (make X widgets per shift, complete Y operations per year with
a death rate of <z%, educate a% of the class to achieve such-and-such a
grade or better at exam). There's usually negotiation from both sides
(management and workforce/unions) on this and there are problems with
setting targets that cause perverse behaviour (one of the classics was
forcing the NHS to get all waiting times for seeing the consultant under
6 months which actually caused a smallish but measurable RISE in average
waiting times) but that's the general rule.

In the specific, in the case of politicians, it's pretty easy. They
publish, of their own accord a statement of "we're going to do this in
the next parliament" e.g. "we're going to introduce austerity measures
to get the deficit down and stimulate the economy because there will be
less debt" and although there is time left, we're also looking into the
serious risk of the first ever triple dip recession. Oops.

There's lots of things by which to judge them though. Michael Gove is
determined to improve education (no problem there). He just seems to be
choosing ways that are illegal, confusing or cause disastrous unexpected
consequences. Surely that must count as a failure in anyone's book?

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 9, 2013
08:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155458)

**154:**

troll (?) rd @ 143\
 *The USA over the last 50 years, as it's devolved from a republic into
a mere democracy.*\
 Oh dear.\
 Politics FAIL oh troll...\
 The Most Serene Republic of Venice

Does that give you a clue?\
 As to the hollowness of your arguments.

Sorry, folks, late to this discussion.

One point.\
 It shows that a lot of us have (some) poins of agreement with the
"libertarians", even though some of them appear to be christian
fruitcakes.\
 We are all, justifiably worried about "The power of the executive"

See also [This article](http://bigthink.com/ideas/14384) from "Big
Think" ....

[![roberth2309](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1498)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
roberth2309 | [February 9, 2013
09:31](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155487)

**155:**

Coincidentally after seeing this topic I came across a review on the
works of Simone Weil. As far as I can see, she claims that most of our
problems with govt stem from political parties. Contrary to what many
think in this group, the collective mindset is inherently dictatorial...
we should be represented by individuals who can follow their conscience
on issues.\
 She is also on the record for saying "Democracy, majority rule, are not
good in themselves. They are merely a means towards goodness..."

[![david.maciver](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1996)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
david.maciver | [February 9, 2013
09:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155493)

**156:**

Back around the AV referendum I proposed a different new voting system.
At the time I was half joking, but I've since become convinced it would
actually be a good idea.

Basic premise is simple: You take exactly the current British system.
Still have local MPs, everyone still votes in general elections and
votes for a single candidate, etc. You just change one detail:

Once everyone casts their vote, you pick a voter at random and use their
choice.

This sounds like the "Just elect the house by lottery" proposals but is
in fact completely different: Your probability of winning the election
is directly proportional to the number of people voting for you.

When I proposed it initially I highlighted that it removed a lot of the
pathologies of voting - the system has no spoilers, no incentive to vote
strategically, etc.

What I've since decided is much more interesting is the fact that
despite the fact that it's based entirely on local constituencies, it
achieves a very strong form of proportional representation: For any
property you care to name (party, religion, race, gender, views on one
specific niche issue), if x% of the votes across the country go to
someone with that property, you expect x% of the parliament to have that
property. This makes it very powerful for getting independents into
power (if roughly x% of the country want an independent candidate,
roughly x% of the parliament will be independents) and helps parties who
are thinly spread over a large number of constituencies.

Hard to say whether it would completely avoid this failure mode, but I
think the dramatic increase in diversity of the house can't but help.

[![GoCaptain](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1157)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[GoCaptain](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1157)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155458)
| [February 9, 2013
09:45](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155495)

**157:**

Oh no, Greg. What the libertarians want is strong, manly, authoritive
government with massive powers of coercion. They just don't want these
powers used against them.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155186)
| [February 9, 2013
09:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155500)

**158:**

(This post's reaching outside my personal experience to things which
I've heard from our politicians - so it's second hand information)

> But my thinking was that the expertise would be provided by expert
> career functionaries based on direction by big picture legislators
> akin to short term high level appointees. They would just, for
> example, create a Minister of the Environment and vote in some vague
> mandates and powers that the MOTE would then run with. In theory.

This is actually the system that we've ended up with. We like to claim
that our politicians build up "experience" over time, and it's true in a
sense, but not the one most people think.

A government minister is one person with a staff of about five. They
stand on one side of the field. On the opposing team is the thousand
bureaucrats that make up the ministry. The minister's objective is to
*change something*. The bureaucracy's objective is to *keep doing what
they have always done*. Given the rate of reshuffles, a minister is
typically in post for about two years. It'll take them the first six
months to really figure out what's going on because their predecessor
was a political opponent who didn't brief them. That gives them about 18
months to accomplish something and they're going to be fought every step
of the way.

The bureaucrats in the ministry have all the experience in education or
health or whatever the issue is. Today, in the UK, the experience which
the politician brings to the table is **digging into obstinate
organisations and making them change direction** - and far too few
ministers are any good at it. A lot of them end up pushing policies
which were handed to them by their ministry. Most of the acts of
parliament are written by the bureaucracy. (To be fair, most of the
controversial acts are written by lobbyists or party think tanks, but
this is a tiny fraction of the hundreds of bills that go before each
parliament)

So that's another reason why things don't seem to change much from one
government to another. The minister changes - the ministry doesn't. Note
that this time, I'm talking about what governments manage to deliver,
rather than the policies which parties talk about - a lot of the
policies "introduced" by this government and the previous one took
years, consumed a lot of money, and some still didn't really go into
effect before the next policy killed them off. Some things, like the
headline tax rate, can be changed very quickly. Most can't.

This is also why the feedback system on job performance is quite broken.
A parliament lasts for 5 years, usually. It can take upwards of 10 years
for a policy to go from announcement to delivery. By the time we find
out what effect a politician had, they're history.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from
david.maciver](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155493)
| [February 9, 2013
09:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155502)

**159:**

> Once everyone casts their vote, you pick a voter at random and use
> their choice.

It sounds like a good idea on paper, on the basis of the mathematics,
but you've missed a crucial hidden criteria for voting systems:

The counting of the votes must be done in such a way that all parties
are confident that the results are correct and fair. Electoral courts
must be able to validate the results in the event of a dispute.

[![tedhowardnz](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1995)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://tedhowardnz.wordpress.com/)
[tedhowardnz](http://tedhowardnz.wordpress.com/ "http://tedhowardnz.wordpress.com/")
| [February 9, 2013
10:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155509)

**160:**

The points you identify seem to me to be valid to a point Charlie, and
there are many deeper issues at play also.\
 Asuffield raised some interesting points.

napadvocacy comes very close to identifying a solution to the problem
you posed, when he writes of real time networks.

rou.xenophobe raises some interesting points which have a degree of
validity, but don't reveal a full picture.

Colin Crounch's post democratic analysis is interesting, and shallow. It
does not explicitly delve into the deeper set of incentive structures
that produce the outcomes described.\
 It seems to me that all such approached are about to be overtaken by
exponential trends. The thing about exponential trends in noisy
environments is that they are invisible in the noise to most people
right up to the point that they emerge as almost vertical walls.

neville.kyut's idea that people need to work harder has no real basis in
reality.\
 The reality is that machines are getting better and better and
producing stuff with little (if any) human input. The fact that those
products are not getting to the people who need them is a failure of the
distribution system (markets and capitalism) not a function of
productive capacity.

heteromeles gives a possible strategy, but it is still one firmly based
in an economic paradigm, and as such, has no hope of ultimate success
(as the deep incentive structure is against it).

First we need to look at the history of democracy.\
 It started in small city states - of just a few thousand people. Each
person had direct contact with the people he represented. When human
groups get much above 200, their stability breaks down. Around 200 seems
to be a limit imposed by many different factors (mostly within the human
brain) on the number of stable social relationships we can maintain in
one context (it seems that we can maintain multiple contexts, and there
does seem to be a working limit of around 200 within any one context).

\
 Before exploring that theme any further, I need to introduce a few
other themes, before bringing them together.

Evolution, cooperation and competition.\
 The traditional view of evolution is one of competition (nature red in
tooth and claw) and that is certainly part of the picture, and it is
only part. The full picture of evolution is seeing that all new levels
of development in evolved systems come about when sets of strategies
come together that allow for new levels of cooperation to stabilise. In
the history of life this has happened many times, between RNA and amino
acids to deliver proteins, then between RNA, proteins and lipids to
deliver cells, then the jump to eukaryotic cells, then multicellular
organisms, then to complex organs, then to brains and to the many levels
of mimetic evolution we now observe.\
 It seems clear to me, that what is required to empower the next level
of evolution, is a set of technologies and strategies that stabilise
cooperation at the global (galactic) level between all self aware
languaging entities.

\
 Money, market valuation, and capitalism. \
 It is clear to me that most of the problems we observe today are the
result of the systemic incentives within the market valuation paradigm.
Markets are great tools for allocating scarce resources, and have served
freedom and humanity well over the last few millennia, and there are
serious limitations in the paradigm.\
 The paradigm is essentially the product of two sets of functions. One
set of functions is how important something is to us, and that can have
a potentially infinite set of components to it. The other set of
functions is how scarce we perceive something to be. The more important
it is, and the less common it is, the more money we are prepared to pay
in the market. Conversely, the less important it is, or the more
abundant it is, the less we are willing to pay.\
 The aspect of this that most miss, that is critical, is that markets
cannot deal meaningfully with real abundance. Real abundance must always
have zero market value, and there is thus a real set of meta incentives
within monetary systems to destroy anything that threatens to deliver
real abundance to all (of anything).

This aspect of market valuation systems (aka money) is in direct
conflict with our exponential development of automated production
systems, that are rapidly approaching the ability to deliver real
abundance of all the necessities of life to every individual. There is
simply no meaningful way to deal with such a thought from within an
economic paradigm - is does not make any sense.

\
 Concentration of power, protection of money and money production.\
 The incentive structure within monetary systems is to deliver free
markets, and the free movement of capital, which logically tends to
accumulate into ever greater clumps in corporations. One trap is that
those involved start to treat fiat money as if it had any meaning in
reality, rather than acknowledging the reality that it is simply a
convenient myth that has had some historical utility, which is now
coming to an end.

\
 Evolution of understanding, intuition, and the role of what is common
to individual minds.\
 As human beings, we did not come with a users manual. It seems that
what happened was, that as language evolved, we came to consciousness as
languaging entities, and became aware of ourselves in a world. We had
little idea about anything; so we made up stories to try and make sense
of what we were. These stories were a product of the contexts of the
time.

\
 Distinctions - binaries to infinities, and the infinity of
possibility.\
 When one first encounters an infinity, one cannot distinguish it. The
simplest act of distinction we can do is to choose some essentially
arbitrary point (though it might have some relevance to us at the time)
and make a binary distinction at that point. As children we each do this
many times, with distinctions like hot/cold, dark/light, tall/short,
right/wrong, good/evil, heavy/light, ....\
 None of those simple binary distinctions has any sort of absolute
reality, they are first order approximations of understanding an
infinity. As our experience sets grow, so do the depths of our
distinctions, and no human mind (I suspect no mind) can actually
comprehend any infinity. All infinities are beyond comprehension by
definition, and we can make every more useful approximations (as we
gather more experience).

Epistemology, probability and error.\
 It seems that all of our experience, all of our perceptions, contain
finite probabilities of error.\
 The more common our experience, the greater is our confidence around
it.\
 Thus, for many of the ordinary every day experiences of being a human,
we have such high confidence that we do not normally think of the
probability of error, until we do something like meet a stage hypnotist,
or a stage magician.

\
 Habits, intuitions, and context.\
 It seems that the human brain is an exceptionally complex set of sets
of collections of patterns, and it is capable of doing many things.\
 We are capable of learning habits. We do this automatically for the
most part, and we can take some conscious control of the process.\
 We are capable of having intuitions. Actually we do this many times a
second, but most of us are rarely conscious of that fact. It seems that
our intuitive faculty (our ability to distinguish pattern that was not
previously distinguished from a set of precepts or concepts) is the
result of the way we store and retrieve information in a distributed
fashion (much more analogous to how LASER holograms are made than how
our current computers store and retrieve information). The really
interesting thing about such "holographic" storage, is that the
intuitions returned are completely dependent upon context. One does not
need to maintain indexes, or indexing algorithms. Simply by changing the
context of recall, all of the available data in memory is automatically
aligned to the new context, and the intuitions returned (most of which
are subconscious) realign accordingly). This can result is state changes
of consciousness that are profound. The habitual aspect of brain
requires a lot of retraining if one wishes to alter such a "state
change" to a "stage change" of awareness.

\
 Now, in order to allow your underlying "holographic" processors to
freely associate, I ask you to consider the contexts of games theory,
information theory, evolution, probability, systems theory (and a few
years of programming at multiple levels is useful in the experience set)
and all aspect of science and the history of humanity, our planet, and
the cosmos within which we find ourselves.

\
 Which bring me to my answer to the question Charlie posed:\
 A credible alternative to democratic governance seems to me to be to
completely decentralise governance, and establish distributed trust
networks.\
 It seems to me that real time communication of information between
intersecting trust networks does provide an alternative. If we are each
responsible for the integrity of our own datasets of such things as,
when did you meet someone, how often do you meet them, how much do you
trust them in different situations or contexts, etc. And we are open
with that information to anyone we trust sufficiently within our
networks, then we could create a system of cooperation that is universal
and highly resistant to cheating at all levels.

If that system is further empowered by a set of machines that are
capable of manufacturing and repairing themselves, and also providing a
basic range of essential goods and services, then no one needs to "work"
to survive. Our age of abundance has secured an abundance of the
essentials of life for everyone.

There are constraints.\
 Reality to be commanded must be obeyed.\
 We are natural evolved entities.\
 We are part of natural ecosystems, and I strongly suspect that we
depend upon them in far more ways than we are currently aware (and we
are aware of many levels of dependence).\
 So this is no licence to act on a whim, and it is freedom for
responsible action (though not freedom from the consequences of action -
the distinction is extremely important).

My 2c worth for the evening.\

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155293)
| [February 9, 2013
10:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155517)

**161:**

*I'm shocked that you didn't actually condemn Mencius Moldbug. My guess
is that you secretly believe him to be a sort of fanatically devoted
Internet uber-troll.*

The first time I met Moldbog his greeting was, "dude! Come inside! Let
me show you the lizard room!"

And there was, indeed, a room full of fricking' huge iguanas and
chameleons. And a snake or two.

Moldbug understands and uses both irony and sarcasm. Can you say the
same of yourself?

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
| [February 9, 2013
10:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155522)

**162:**

napadvocacy @134\
 "get mad about drones, torture, indefinite detention. You absolutely
should. But don't confuse the existence of flaws in the democratic
government of the moment for systemic failure"

But there is a trend that the system increasingly doesn't respect
itself. It violates its own rules out of sheer laziness and sense of
immune empowerment, even when it would be too easy to produce the a
comparable result within the existing rules. That is systemic decay. I
think the attitude that the rules are untenable so we should just
violate them with a smile really accelerated with the conspiracy to
force everybody to violate Nixon's 55 mile per hour speed limit.

At least those practicing slavery made an effort to keep it technically
legal. In the absence of the viability of amending the constitution, gun
control for instance could be done self respectingly by simply making it
illegal to sell guns of whatever type. Doesn't violate "keep," in fact
mandates it. Indefinite detention of foreigners could be made legal by
simply giving detainees triels under country of citizenship. Or, more
creatively, declaring them insane. Someone says he intends to kill you,
I say keeping him locked up is self defense. If the grounds is less
clear, maybe reconsider doing it. Drone strikes could be done more
carefully by giving public notice that certain areas and persons are
targets and association with them is likely to be dangerous. Where
possible, summon targets to report for trial, then they are evading
apprehension. Or maybe reconsider if it can't be done right.

Sometimes going through the motions of navigating the maze can be
therapeutic. But there isn't the creativity, there is just the exertion
of authority by what are essentially anarchist moles.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
scentofviolets](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155384)
| [February 9, 2013
10:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155523)

**163:**

*How do you evaluate job performance?*

That is indeed a key question.

(As Tony Blair put it, "I entered office at my least experienced and
most popular. I left office at my most experienced and least popular."
Popularity and experience are often inversely related; as witness
everyone's fondness for that expert and accomplished prime minister,
Gordon Brown.)

Also: is job performance in policy-making posts to be evaluated on the
basis of successful policy-making, or the making of successful policies?
And if the latter, what time frame do we use for reviewing them? (Look
how quarterly profit/loss accounting helps corporations plan for the
very long term when, like Boeing, they're manufacturing products with a
30-year service life.)

[![david.maciver](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1996)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
david.maciver replied to [this comment from
asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155502)
| [February 9, 2013
10:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155525)

**164:**

If the worst problems with the system are the practical implementation
of it, I'm OK with spending a bit of time and ingenuity on solving those
rather than just say "Oh it has practical problems, it couldn't possibly
work" :-)

The description was intended to be conceptual. You wouldn't want to
literally pick a random ballot paper. It's relatively easy to solve in a
way that lets you make the system deterministic but based on a secret
that is distributed before the election.

Example: You distribute a random seed to each constituency to be opened
after the ballots are tallied. When the elections are announced closed
you announce a second random seed nationally. You combine these in each
constituency to produce a fixed number N between 0 and number of votes
in that constituency. You order the votes alphabetically by name of
candidate they voted for and pick the Nth. It's deterministic,
reproduceable, and fairly stable against recounts because most of the
time you'll be deep inside a block of votes.

[![nydwracu](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1997)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/)
[nydwracu](http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/ "http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
romeostevensit](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155226)
| [February 9, 2013
10:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155527)

**165:**

*Political decisions do, in fact, track the median voter's preferences
fairly well. Everything is working correctly.*

That they do, in a sense, allowing for some degree of time-lag, in
either direction: political decisions lag behind popular opinion in
cases like federal marijuana policy (although there are surely more
interesting ones that could be found by someone writing something less
inherently uninteresting than a blog comment!), and anticipate public
opinion quite a bit in cases like desegregation.

But even ignoring that, the problem persists. Whence the median voter's
preferences? Is the media completely irrelevant to the formation of a
voter's political opinions? What about formal education? What degree of
consensus is there among people who work in the media and formal
education? Do they trend in a certain direction relative to the median
voter? The answers to those questions are: the Cathedral, of course not,
of course not, a lot, and leftward.

The Cathedral is another bit of Moldbuggery. I've had bad experiences
with spam filters before so I won't link to the exact post of his that
this is from, but this bit is pretty self-contained:

*The great power center of 2008 is the Cathedral. The Cathedral has two
parts: the accredited universities and the established press. The
universities formulate public policy. The press guides public opinion.
In other words, the universities make decisions, for which the press
manufactures consent. It's as simple as a punch in the mouth.*

*The Cathedral operates as the brain of a broader power structure, the
Polygon or Apparat - the permanent civil service. The Apparat is the
civil service proper (all nonmilitary officials whose positions are
immune to partisan politics, also known as "democracy"), plus all those
formally outside government whose goal is to influence or implement
public policy - ie, NGOs. (There's a reason NGOs have to remind
themselves that they're "non-governmental.")*

*(If we did not have an existing category for the press and
universities, we could easily think of them as NGOs - in particular, the
system wherein journalists are nominally supervised by for-profit media
corporations is purely historical. If the Times and its
pseudo-competitors ever fail, as they may well, the responsibility of
funding and organizing journalism will fall to the great foundations,
who will certainly be happy to pick up the relatively small expense.)*

[![nydwracu](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1997)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/)
[nydwracu](http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/ "http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
nydwracu](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155527)
| [February 9, 2013
10:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155529)

**166:**

...er, those last three paragraphs are all Moldbug, I guess italic tags
don't span line breaks or?

**[[ Seemingly not. Now fixed for you. mod ]]**

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155457)
| [February 9, 2013
11:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155530)

**167:**

And it's exactly that sort of targetting which has caused problems in
the NHS and suchlike. The evil of managerialism is that that it thinks
you can sum everything up in box ticking and numbers.

Which works okay in the widget factory, but doesn't in a human based
environment with many many variables. How is a nurse supposed to meet
certain targets if they can't control what the new patients on the ward
are like? One week they may need lots of attention, another they don't.

Meanwhile, back in the world of widget making, or in my case, furnace
insulation making, the place I used to work at did bonuses. Which meant
a certain amount of trimming and hasty work was done to ensure that
targets were met.\
 In fact, Scotttish Engineering, a quango/ assisting organisation for
Scottish manufactring companies, stopped suggesting that they use bonus
schemes years ago, because such things are counterproductive as the
targets and such distort what people do.\
 This has been observed in the police, with superindentents actually
getting performance related pay, leading to PC's under pressure to
ignore or pay attention to certain types of crime.

One answer is professionalisation, but as we've seen with surgeons and
the inability of some to admit that their techniques dont work or their
capabilities aren't as good as they used to be, that isn't the complete
answer. Another is creating a workplace culture in which you all
contribute to quality and good outcomes without being checked against
tick boxes every hour. Sure, you still need to record stats like deaths
and the like, but instead of using them as an excuse to sack people, you
use it as a method of finding out what is wrong.

Meanwhile, everything is moving in the opposite direction - more
supervisors, more boxes to tick, more paperwork, because people think
managers are the answer, rather than leaders, and who needs
professionals, they are awkward and don't do as they are told, placing
patients above targets and boxes ticked.

[![Tim
Whitworth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1999)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Tim
Whitworth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1999)
| [February 9, 2013
11:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155535)

**168:**

I propose that this beige dictatorship (/oligarchy) is substantially
vulnerable to corruption by money, and that this could represent an
escalating problem.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155530)
| [February 9, 2013
11:16](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155540)

**169:**

See also [Baumol's cost
disease](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baumol%27s_cost_disease).
Basically, you can't obtain arbitrary efficiency improvements in
human-labour-intensive jobs that are not amenable to automation. So the
cost of services provided by such roles tends to rise over time relative
to other goods and services which can be automated.

If managerialists set targets for performance improvements in ignorance
of this principle you end up with horrors like the [Mid-Staffordshire
NHS trust
scandal](http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/mid-staffordshire-nhs-trust).

[![https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawkPl6usGgobTUsN9gChjX9SyVy1uevtnho](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2000)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawkPl6usGgobTUsN9gChjX9SyVy1uevtnho
| [February 9, 2013
12:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155558)

**170:**

You've nailed Charlie. It's the party system crossed with rep democracy
that has lead us down this garden path. It pushes governance towards an
appeasement route and we get the lowest common denominator. No one is
willing to take a hard stand to do the correct thing if it jeopardises
an election victory.

A large part of the part problem is that unless you are extreme right or
left you are highly unlikely to ever agree 100% with any party. So your
vote invariably goes to the party that disagrees least with your world
view so collectively you end up with the least worst option instead of
the best option.

But it doesn't necessarily need to be that way any more. Rep democracy
was only necessary when we couldn't all be directly involved in a
decision. It has changed the landscape so it's about time that we
reviewed what types of governance can be achieved and suits the tools we
have at hand.

One model that strikes me as worth considering is allowing each citizen
to directly elect up to 5 ministers of the miniseries of their choosing.
This gives your vote(s) value not only for whom they are for but for
what areas of government are most important to you. You could even
consider allowing several ministers within each ministry each having
voting power as per their results from the last election. It would
completely eradicate the least worst option result and would go a long
way towards undermining the party system as candidates with relevance
and experience to a ministry get up over party hacks.

Or we just wait until we can hand ball governance to an AI. We just
gotta hope that we have enough deep control over it that it doesn't
decide that humanity IS the problem.

[![frank
c](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2001)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[frank
c](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2001) |
[February 9, 2013
14:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155597)

**171:**

Once again you've managed to touch a point with many people! As some
others, I too have long since decided that representative democracy and
the party system are part of the problem, not the solution. Granted it's
First World Problem (tm), but I'm for striving for improvement!\
 Personally, I'd favour a direct democracy with the subsidiarity
principle placed firmly front and center: It'd cancel this continued
stage performance, where we may choose the actors but not the play. It
disrupts the beige dictatorship failure mode. Organised with foresight,
it does not introduce any equally bad failure modes that I am aware of.
In all aspects it should equal or improve on representative democracy,
so in this sense it would pareto dominate it.

@94 Reading all that stuff must have mightily confused you, if you can't
even get the relation of the terms "Republic" and "Democracy" right any
more.\

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
| [February 9, 2013
14:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155606)

**172:**

Meh. The situation you describe is the result of people not voting for
better candidates. I'm not sure how you jump from that to thinking that
this is a problem with representative democracy. People can vote for
people who are better; they just don't a lot of the time. Changing the
system wouldn't change this underlying problem, it'd probably just make
it worse.

And yes, if you wait until the general election, you're most likely into
"lesser of two evils" territory. If you want to make a difference, get
involved much earlier.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155606)
| [February 9, 2013
15:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155625)

**173:**

How do we get better candidates? The main parties usually have a lock on
who gets to stand - often overruling local electors who think someone
else would be a better candidate. The new numpty still gets voted in,
because of their party ticket, but that doesnt' mean they will be a good
candidate.

Also increased centralisation of the party's has undermined any attempt
at being mass membership party's.

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
replied to [this comment from
guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155625)
| [February 9, 2013
15:37](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155633)

**174:**

In the US, parties can't overrule local electors. If people want to vote
for a candidate in the primaries, there's nothing that can stop them. I
understand in the UK it's a bit tougher and requires people to either
work within the parties or run as independents - in which case, that's
what they need to do.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from
asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154980)
| [February 9, 2013
15:45](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155635)

**175:**

"We are fundamentally committed to constitutional reform and breaking
out of the cycle of "two parties, zero differences". But all the
canvassing, polling, and election results indicates that the public at
large isn't very interested - something around a fifth of the population
feels strongly about it, and the rest thinks the system is working fine.
That has two important effects. Firstly, we can't get candidates elected
if we spend too much time talking about constitutional issues. Secondly,
the media will not print stories about it even when we send them a press
release, because they think "people aren't interested", so it's hard to
get the message out."

Speaking as an outside observer, the LD party is now the party of zero
differences. It (or rather, the leadership) has been helping the Tories
be Tories, and much more Toryish than both the Tories and the LD
promised in the election.

This is a problem for third parties, I'd guess - party death by beige.

[![the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155633)
| [February 9, 2013
15:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155638)

**176:**

"In the US, parties can't overrule local electors. If people want to
vote for a candidate in the primaries, there's nothing that can stop
them."

That's a bit disingenuous, isn't it? Just last year both the Cripps and
the Bloods demonstrated at their conventions exactly how the party
apparat deals with those who possess inconvenient things such as
principles.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from
cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155013)
| [February 9, 2013
15:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155640)

**177:**

"\
 @Vanzetti: The Western block managed the entire Cold War maintaining
traditions and regulations of Human Rights and "Rechtsstaat" (or rule of
law)."

In the USA, at least, human and civil rights improved tremendously from
1947-1989/91.\

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
replied to [this comment from the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155638)
| [February 9, 2013
15:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155643)

**178:**

It's not disingenuous at all. How are the parties going to stop someone
from voting for who they want? When someone gets into the voting booth,
the parties can't control who they vote for.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155633)
| [February 9, 2013
16:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155644)

**179:**

*In the US, parties can't overrule local electors.*

That's how the Conservative Party operates in the UK. Labour, the
LibDems, et al tend to be more centralized. In the case of Labour,
*much* more centralized -- the central party apparat parachute
candidates into constituencies and the constituencies are expected to
shut up and deal.

Both methods have problems. In the case of the Tories, their grass-roots
anarchy results in the prime minister having to deal with endless
back-biting back-bench factions in the Parliamentary party. In the case
of Labour, the system was deliberately engineered (in the late 80s early
90s) to ruthlessly suppress dissent, which resulted in it becoming
possible to hijack the party from the top down (thank you, Tony Blair).

Note that once a candidate is in Parliament, they're subject to the
party whips, i.e. they don't get to vote their conscience without
consequences if the party has a strong policy on the matter in question.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155155)
| [February 9, 2013
16:06](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155646)

**180:**

"Your point about the Tea Party misses the fact that they got a lot of
their funding during the first Obama term from rich wingnuts -- these
folks have now closed the money taps, because they poured eight digit
sums into the machinery and got nothing except a pain in the wallet."

Incorrect - they got a false front reactionary couter-wave, which
sharply limited what the Democrats could do. Remember, in 2008, the GOP
was discredited, and the oligarchs needed a stopgap.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from
aggray](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155159)
| [February 9, 2013
16:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155648)

**181:**

"Your point about the Tea Party misses the fact that they got a lot of
their funding during the first Obama term from rich wingnuts -- these
folks have now closed the money taps, because they poured eight digit
sums into the machinery and got nothing except a pain in the wallet."

A lot of real and 100% dishonest sentiment, the sort of peoplewho were
shocked!!!! at big, corrupt government the moment the the other gius
won. People who hat Big Gov,except when it comes to war, surveillance,
assassination, torture, and never prosecuting big bankers. And their
Social Security and Medicare.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from
roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155160)
| [February 9, 2013
16:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155650)

**182:**

"Democracy in particular is a particularly pernicious form of
government, for as soon as the hoi polloi figure out that they can vote
themselves largesse from the public treasury, the jig's up"

\
 Mr. Pournelle, it's the 21st century and the people who seem to rake on
all of that loot are the 1% (really, the 9.1%).

BTW, the USSR has fallen.

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155644)
| [February 9, 2013
16:26](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155656)

**183:**

I suppose then you're left with the same problem I mentioned before,
which is not a problem of democracy. If the electorate keeps voting for
a party that ruthlessly suppresses dissent, then it's a problem with
individuals, not the system. No doubt centralized parties make things
more difficult than primary systems, but the electorate still wields
power. They just do a poor job of using it.

[![the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155643)
| [February 9, 2013
16:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155659)

**184:**

I guess it's a political version of the Fermi paradox.

If it's actually possible for decent people of good conscience to get
elected and supplant the careerist scum who typically gain and hold
office , why hasn't it happened yet?

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155644)
| [February 9, 2013
17:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155662)

**185:**

The whole point about the rise of the political classes in the UK is
that the Conservatives were one of the last to properly centralise
power, and the point about Cameron et al is that they have done so,
making them more like new labour etc.

[![Stina
Leicht](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1587)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Stina
Leicht](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1587)
| [February 9, 2013
17:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155668)

**186:**

Suddenly, the phrase "Keep Calm and Carry On" springs to mind. [cough]
(And now I suddenly don't feel so bad about bringing up heated issues.)
Anyway, I agree. Democracy is fraught with issues these days. I also
agree that they crept in via a mentality that values the status quo
above all else and that there is a corporate mindset involved. I also
agree that the issues are complex. Where we disagree is that the issues
are irreversable.

In the US (and I can only speak for the US) and an observer of US
politics for [cough] years--the problem can be traced back at least as
far as *Nixon.*[1] (Nixon's corrupt, power-mad Republican Party is where
Karl Rove learned his trade.[2]) In fact, Karl Rove was very nearly
prosecuted for illegal activities (spying on the competition) back in
1972. Watergate saved his ass in that it provided bigger fish to fry.
Rove has been pushing for a one-party system ever since '70s.

Next, we have Ronald Reagan who touted the myth that big business is
somehow more efficient, and thus, more ethical than big government.[3]
And here we have the start of the concept that government=bad. Also,
this is where we ran headlong into the problems of corporations running
the state. The fox is in the hen house.

So, we have 1) political parties using CIA tactics to eliminate the
opposition and 2) big business worming its way into government
via...campaign contributions.

One of the biggest problems in US politics is that one is required to be
a multi-billionare in order to run for national office. It's impossible
to do otherwise. No one in the upper levels of politics actually has a
concept of what regular American life is like because they're all super
rich. Thus, a majority of the American people don't actually have
representation. Any other country would see campaign contributions for
what they are: bribes.

So, corporations pushed for less regulation via bribes and vilifying
'big government.' With less regulation, corporations became people, the
anti-pollution laws were losened, the ATF was made totally ineffective
as a regulatory force, long standing monopoly laws were pulled[4],
financial institutions went back into the gambling business[5], jobs
were shipped to countries where labor (even slave labor) is exploited,
corporate tax loopholes were expanded, and the list goes on.

Then we have the media. Back when Reagan was president he repealled a
law that prohibited the media from portraying opinion as fact. The
'common sense' reason was given that people have enough sense to discren
the difference between fact and fiction. "Why should big government have
such a law? It's stupid!" As we've seen over and over again, this is a
very dangerous thing because *people actually can't discern the
difference.* And because monopolies were allowed--once again our key
media outlets came under the control of a select few individuals who
ultimately might as well be foreign interests.[6]

I know all this sounds pretty impossible to deal with, but frankly, this
isn't the first time we've seen this set of problems. We're basically
re-living the Gilded Age. (Everything cycles.) I seem to recall that the
main thing that pulled us out of that tail-spin was the impact of
investigative journalism. Today, we have the internet. I have hope that
all of this can and will change. We've done it before. It's just going
to take a lot of time and hard work. It did, after all, take both to get
us here.\
 ------------------------------\
 [1] Although, one should note that Nixon didn't appear out of nowhere.
Mainly, I want to note that this isn't a new problem that appeared
overnight.

[2] He also studied with George H.W. Bush who was the Director of the
CIA before he became president. It's no accident that the tactics used
by Rove bear a striking resemblance to those used by such an agency.

[3] Never mind that governing has totally different goals from business.
In certain American minds they are one in the same. This is a direct
result of Reagan's super-expensive hammer/toilet seat and welfare mother
driving a Caddy urban myths.

[4] Hello, 'Too big to fail.'

[5] Factors which brought about the Great Depression in the US.

[6] Big businesses consider themselves to no longer be tied to their
country of origin. They speak of themselves as 'multi-national' and
'global.' Thus, their needs no longer match those of the state in which
they were once tied.

[![cdodgson](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/livejournal_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1093)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/livejournal_logo.png)](http://cdodgson.livejournal.com/)
[cdodgson](http://cdodgson.livejournal.com/ "http://cdodgson.livejournal.com/")
replied to [this comment from Stina
Leicht](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155668)
| [February 9, 2013
18:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155677)

**187:**

It's an exaggeration to say that one must be a billionaire to run for
national office --- Barack Obama certainly wasn't. What you do need is
sponsorship from the extremely wealthy --- meaning in practice one of
what OGH has previously defined as the \*real\* two parties of American
politics: the crazy billionaires ("let's kill the poor and take all
their stuff!"), and the sane billionaires ("but if you do that, who'll
mow our lawns?"). Which, in turn, limits acceptable political discourse
to the range between those two parties.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155656)
| [February 9, 2013
18:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155686)

**188:**

*it's a problem with individuals, not the system*

The system is simply the manner in which individuals are accustomed to
interacting with each other.

*How are the parties going to stop someone from voting for who they
want?*

Deciding whose names get on the ballots is a big part of it. Deciding
whose commercials get on the air is another big part of it; you can't
get elected if nobody's heard of you, no matter how good your ideas are.
Having necessary political infrastructure owned and operated at the
party level is a third part; if Bob is elected to Congress as an
independent and Alice is elected as a Democrat, guess which one is
automatically slotted in to the existing nationwide political machinery
on everything from Congressional committee assignments to donor lists?\

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from Stina
Leicht](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155668)
| [February 9, 2013
19:25](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155693)

**189:**

The trouble with assuming people can tell the difference between fact
and fiction is that when opinion and just outright lies that the viewer
wants to believe are presented as fact... then it's much harder to tell.

Mix in some fact and it gets harder, particularly for random consumption
- you're far more likely (well I am) to check facts in a science paper
you're reading carefully for some reason, or a history text or similar,
than something you're half watching on TV while having a coffee, yelling
at the kids and so on.

Add in repetition, and it gets even easier to believe it. In fact, even
the people peddling the lies start to believe them if the Fox analyst
that refused to believe the Ohio result is anything to go by.

[![jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jessicayogini | [February 9, 2013
19:39](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155696)

**190:**

I think that representative democracy has become less functional across
the entire first world in recent decades. This suggests that the problem
is nothing specific to any one nation nor any one form of representative
democracy. But since representative democracy has functioned better in
the past, the cause can not be inherent in representative democracy.\
 My own candidate for the cause is that the economy has long reached a
point where it needs to shift to be knowledge-centered but our social
systems have not kept up. So we have a slowly unfolding tendency toward
decay, which is particularly acute when it comes to social
consciousness.\
 Alternatively, one might see the root cause being the shift in power
from working people to the elite created by introducing over a billion
(originally) desperately poor workers in the 3rd world and former Soviet
countries. Arbitraging centuries of misery in a dark necromancy. \
 Either way, what it shows up is the same, in a corrupting of all
processes related to creating social understanding.\

[![IRMO](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1888)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1)
[IRMO](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1")
| [February 9, 2013
19:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155698)

**191:**

In the early 19th Century, Americans were constantly forming and then
dissolving associations for various purposes. Now, almost none of these
paid their officers, so dissolution was fairly easy. Most famously,
organizations devoted to the abolition of slavery simply disbanded after
the end of the Civil War. Not that the work was finished. Providing
decent opportunities to the newly freed slaves, and advancing legal
equality for them was also important, but that work was done by new
organizations opening with a clean slate (albeit with many of the same
people heading them. Serial activism is something the Unitarian and
Episcopal churches subsidized with their clergy, which they still do).

The same thing happened with prohibitionist organizations, and with
associations that fought too reverse prohibition. But there is the issue
of what happens when getting anything done requires paying people full
time.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
| [February 9, 2013
19:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155699)

**192:**

I know it's not an original thought, but I can't help wondering if we
need a good revolution in most of the first world countries.

Any system that is about power, probably any system in fact, gets gamed.
I suspect a lot of the current democracies are gamed to the point of
failing to match the best of intentions with which they were created, or
even the worst of intentions.

I'm not advocating a return to revolution each time to change despots.
But every now and then an revolution or two in short order to try and
set up a better system might work, for a century or two, until it too
becomes massively gamed.

[![tetron.interreality](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1992)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
tetron.interreality | [February 9, 2013
20:26](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155701)

**193:**

Another idea to make politicians more accountable: how about we separate
job evaluation from the selection of a replacement, and add some
personal risk? Each election cycle, voters would cast a vote of either
approve, disapprove, or jail. If 50%+1 approve, the politician is
automatically reelected. If 50%+1 disapprove, a new election is held for
which the politician is not eligible. If 50%+1 say "go to jail", the
politician spends a year in a minimum security prison. If there are less
than 50% "jail" votes, they are converted into "disapprove" votes.\

[![IRMO](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1888)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1)
[IRMO](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1")
replied to [this comment from
roland.dobbins](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155293)
| [February 9, 2013
20:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155705)

**194:**

"The USA over the last 50 years, as it's devolved from a republic into a
mere democracy."

That is such a profoundly silly argument. The USA was never a republic
or a democracy. The USA was, and is, an amalgam of Greek, Roman, Saxon,
Norman, Swiss, Dutch, and yes, Judeo-Christian notions of governance
(the latter was particulary significant in the early decades, when
Anglican Virgina, Puritan Massachusetts, Quaker Pennsylvania were all
expressly theocratic).

Plus small elements that are clearly a reaction to conditions at the
founding. The Constitution is on a strict calendar because of the whole
lack-of-representation in Parliament problem. America had no MPs because
there was no way to dissolve parliament and reconvene a new one quickly
if it meant shipping messengers to America and collecting new MPs to
London in a timely fashion. So when the new government was formed, it
was decided to use a calendar.

[![davecb.42](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1017)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
davecb.42 | [February 9, 2013
20:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155709)

**195:**

The bland and beige state can be changed when a party suffers a big
enough defeat. The current ruling party in Canada, the Conservatives,
had been reduced to two seats, and came back by being taken over by our
local hard-right party, "Reform", who are anything but bland.

Right now, their main opposition, the Liberals, have fallen into
decline, and are looking exceedingly hard for a way to come back. It
rather looks like they will, in part because some very non-bland members
are running hard for the post of leader.

My own MP, Martha Hall Findlay, recently came out in her campaign
against what used to be a shibboleth, "supply management". Supply
management used to be popular when we had lots of small farms struggling
to stay alive by selling milk and eggs, as it gave them some price
guarantees.

A hundred years later, we have factory farms run by the blandest of
corporations, making out like *bandits* at the expense of people who buy
the milk at artificially inflated prices.

The professionally bland now have a problem: they can come out for the
status quo, which their paymasters would prefer, but if they do they'll
be held up to public criticism for supporting a rip-off by big business
against consumers. And they won't be able to point to the small farmers,
because they're all out of business.

People with actual opinions are running, with a conscious intention of
fixing the current bland mess you describe. Why? Because excessive
blanditude was one of the reasons they suffered significant previous
losses!

I suspect the party will end up reforming itself for a human generation
or two, by following Martha into *evidence-based* policy making. If so,
then we're OK until the master of beige can start creating their own
facts to back up their opinions and preferences

--dave

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155699)
| [February 9, 2013
21:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155713)

**196:**

Revolutions occur when regimes become intolerable. Is successful
revolution against a beige dictatorship even possible? By definition
they keep the majority just happy enough, so are unlikely to drive a
revolution. Also by definition, however, they are not optimally
effective, so external events can make life miserable and there could be
a revolution against the misery brought on by incompetence. Like severe
economic problems or a war with the Kaiser. Also perhaps they can be
changed quickly by the equivalent of a Gorbachev.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155135)
| [February 9, 2013
21:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155714)

**197:**

*I remember in Economics 101\
 about how Keynesianism was described, "it doesn't matter where the
government spending goes, it could go into a pit, it will stimulate the
economy."*

At some point if you get too many make work jobs then the economy
doesn't work anymore. Someone has to actually product something for an
economy to work.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155714)
| [February 9, 2013
21:49](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155720)

**198:**

In the Army we had these gadgets on our diesel trucks that were for
starting them quickly in cold weather. As I recall they injected ether
or something into the fuel mix. So, a stimulus is like that ether--not
good for a steady diet.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155713)
| [February 9, 2013
21:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155721)

**199:**

*Revolutions occur when regimes become intolerable. Is successful
revolution against a beige dictatorship even possible? By definition
they keep the majority just happy enough*

No.

By definition they keep **their backers** happy enough.

Their backers may not be the majority. (One could argue that in the USA
-- and in the UK, currently -- they clearly aren't.)

Gorbachev, in Soviet terms, was a disastrous failure. Meant well, tried
to fix the system, it was more broken than he realized (due to
systematic lying by production agencies) and it broke even worse.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155714)
| [February 9, 2013
22:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155724)

**200:**

*At some point if you get too many make work jobs then the economy
doesn't work anymore. Someone has to actually product something for an
economy to work.*

There are two common problems in an economy, insufficient supply or
insufficient demand. To figure out which, go to the mall. If the shelves
are nearly empty and you can't afford what little is for sale, it's a
supply problem (e.g. Soviet Russia). If the shelves are packed to
bursting and sellers are offering large (<20%) discounts, it's a demand
problem.

Keynesian stimulus is an appropriate remedy for problems stemming from
insufficient demand. This happens to be the problem we currently have
throughout the developed world.

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
replied to [this comment from Stina
Leicht](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155668)
| [February 9, 2013
22:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155729)

**201:**

This is a very good point: people like Rumsfeld and Cheney were already
toxic in the Nixon and Reagan era; under the George W. Bush
administraion, we gathered the fruits of years of maturing,
consolidation of power and lucrative links with business. I shudder to
think of what will happen if people like John Yoo or Douglas Feith
manage to fall on their feet, build successful carrers and make a
comeback in 20 or 30 years.

[![Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.krazykimchi.com)
[Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)
| [February 9, 2013
22:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155732)

**202:**

I believe the UK has valuable experience in neutering formerly powerful
institutions such as the monarchy, church, peerage, etc into merely
ceremonial institutions.

I'd favour organizing some nonprofit foundations/NGOs to take over basic
human needs like housing, healthcare, food, etc... it seems governments
fall over themselves to farm these out to the private sector anyway.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155732)
| [February 9, 2013
22:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155736)

**203:**

What makes you think they'vebeen neutered?

The peerage doesn't have much power -- the legislative/revision element
has been turned into a kind of glorified committee full of bureaucrats
appointed for a life term -- but the church is still established and has
enough clout to meddle in law-making, and the monarchy has a rather
shadowy [veto
power](http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2011/oct/30/prince-of-wales-veto-legislation)
of alarming proportions.

[![the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155699)
| [February 9, 2013
22:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155739)

**204:**

"I suspect a lot of the current democracies are gamed to the point of
failing to match the best of intentions with which they were created..."

That's something that I, too, have long suspected. It needn't be a
revolution in the traditional sense, either. Just anything to shake
things up and invalidate the old models - a year of Jubilee on steroids,
if you like.\

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
| [February 9, 2013
22:48](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155742)

**205:**

repeat of \#199, with "greater than" sign removed because it caused
trouble.

**[[ Fixed post \#200 for you anyway. Mod ]]**

At some point if you get too many make work jobs then the economy
doesn't work anymore. Someone has to actually product something for an
economy to work.

There are two common problems in an economy, insufficient supply or
insufficient demand. To figure out which, go to the mall. If the shelves
are nearly empty and you can't afford what little is for sale, it's a
supply problem (e.g. Soviet Russia). If the shelves are packed to
bursting and sellers are offering large (more than about 20%), it's a
demand problem.

Keynesian stimulus is an appropriate remedy for problems stemming from
insufficient demand. This happens to be the problem we currently have
throughout the developed world.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
roberth2309](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155073)
| [February 9, 2013
23:26](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155747)

**206:**

*One possible way out of this gridlock is to preface every law with a
social justification for its existence, a list of social deliverables
that have to be achieved in a certain time frame and a sunset clause
that forces bad laws to be re-evaluated or abolished after a certain
time period.*

In the US most (all?) laws passed by Congress by stating why they are to
exist. And most cite the Commerce clause of the Constitution as that
clause has the broadest opening to make a law constitutional.

But if you read some of these preambles you can get some real laughs out
of how far they stretch reality to try and make some new federal power
constitutional.

In my opinion any basis for a law can be weasel worded such that it will
never expire. Most of the time the people pushing for a law have
absolutely not desire to see it go away and so any expiration
requirements will be watered down to the extend they will never happen.

And I can just see the court cases when a law is though to expire by one
interest group and not by another. You think we have fights now, just
wait for these.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155644)
| [February 10, 2013
00:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155751)

**207:**

> That's how the Conservative Party operates in the UK. Labour, the
> LibDems, et al tend to be more centralized.

I can't speak for the other two parties on this one, but for us (Lib
Dems), absolutely not. I'm speaking here are somebody who will be on the
shortlisting committee for my constituency when it kicks off in a week
or two, so I am intimately familiar with the process. All applicants to
be candidates must pass the national approvals process, but that's not
at all hard if you're a liberal and not a flaming nutcase - in large
part it's a test of whether you can stand up to press pressure without
breaking down.

After that, the process is simple (this version is somewhat abridged,
the real rules run to a couple of pages). When a constituency is ready
to select a candidate, it appoints a shortlisting committee (made
exclusively from party members who live in the constituency) which will
advertise nationally for candidates and sift through the applications to
throw out people who have entirely failed to read the application
paperwork - and the committee's mandate is to approve as broad a
selection of candidates as they possibly can. All accepted applicants
are then put to a ballot of party members who live in the constituency.
The national party has **absolutely no say in the matter**. They are
explicitly forbidden to meddle.

We believe in localism and we are really serious about it.

[![the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)
| [February 10, 2013
00:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155753)

**208:**

And another thing! (Sorry, always wanted to do that).

The whole "peaceful succession" / "transfer of power" benefit of Western
democracy thing is something that I hear a lot. I do wonder, however,
whether a succession or transfer can truthfully be said to have taken
place, when all that's changed is the glove puppets and the new lot have
the same hands up their arses as the last lot did.

[![jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jessicayogini replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155721)
| [February 10, 2013
00:46](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155756)

**209:**

"By definition they keep their backers happy enough."

And so far, they have also kept the knowledge worker ("creative") class
in the fold. These are the folks who often produced the ideas that the
broader masses rallied behind.

I think RDSouth was correct that a revolution (or even major positive
reform) against a beige dictatorship is difficult. But not because they
always have majority backing so much as that they do not present a
visible point against which to apply leverage. \
 They are beige and they are non-transparent.\

[![jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jessicayogini | [February 10, 2013
00:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155760)

**210:**

By the way, I think it is only the first world that is run by Martians.
The badly run parts of the second and third worlds are run by classic
Earthling thugs and tyrants.

[![Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.krazykimchi.com)
[Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155736)
| [February 10, 2013
00:59](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155761)

**211:**

To effectively neuter an institution, it's best if it is not aware of
it, or else you get 18 year old kings taking back their throne like
Moldbug was talking about.

In my pet scenario I envisage the game of democratic politics continuing
as it is, drawing out all the authoritarian leaders and enthralling
their followers. In order for this to be effective they would have to
have some levers of actual power, preferrably status related like the
Prince of Wales apparently has. Meanwhile the actual running of
important things is hopefully left to rational professionals\*.

I do not know if someone actually engineered this state of affairs - in
the case of the monarchy it's more plausible, the church seems to be
more of a case of cultural drift.

\*The checks and balances on this group would be of course that they
cannot be seen to be in charge, so in effect they aren't, for status
values of "being in charge"

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155686)
| [February 10, 2013
01:00](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155763)

**212:**

The parties can't stop anyone from getting their names on the ballot.
It's true that some states make this more difficult than it should be,
but not to the extent that they can overrule the electorate. We've even
seen examples of successful write in campaigns when the candidate
preferred by the voters is not on the ballot.

Likewise, the media doesn't keep good people from voting for who they
want to vote for. It merely sways uninformed voters (the vast majority)
who are too disinterested or lazy to spend half an hour researching the
different candidates, and instead make their decision based on
advertisements. Again, the problem is that people want a system that
will work without requiring them to pay attention or exert any effort.
You can't blame democracy for human sloth.

[![IRMO](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1888)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1)
[IRMO](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1")
| [February 10, 2013
01:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155765)

**213:**

"\
 In the early 19th Century, Americans were constantly forming and then
dissolving associations for various purposes"

Elaborating on this a little furhter, in the 19th Century, all Americans
had a deep familiarity with parliamentary procedure, and seemingly a
love for it. THis was the era in which Gen. Robert wrote Robert's Rules
of Order. So forming associations was easy as far as they were
concerned. And nobody ran associations for a living, so dissolving them
was also easy.

Nowadays, we have a more populated society, in the US and beyond, which
makes any sort of policy push a lot harder and means it requires hiring
people to do it full time. And it does not happen spontaneously the way
it once did, which is why we saw the Occupier protesters come up with
rules of order that are so tedious they make Robert's Rules look good in
comparison.

Still, the Occupiers had the right idea about one thing. If you want the
political process to yield a beige interest in favor of a populist one,
sitting in a public square and sleeping rough in it is a good first
step.

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
replied to [this comment from the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155659)
| [February 10, 2013
01:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155769)

**214:**

Why hasn't it happened yet? Comment \#26 summed it up pretty well:

"The problem is that resistance is exhausting and so few people are
willing to do it. Many will complain bitterly, but they won't come out
and work to change things. Spectating is easy, and they can shout at the
TV instead of doing something about it."

It's not a paradox anymore than global warming still being a problem is
a paradox. Things don't fix themselves, and they require effort. Right
now the vast majority of people can't be bothered to work on improving
our political landscape.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
TRX](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155277)
| [February 10, 2013
01:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155774)

**215:**

*... randomized ...\
 Objectors often say, "what if incompetent or evil people were then put
into office?"\
 My usual reply is, "how could we tell?"*

But we'd get a lot more guys like this:\

[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zNZczIgVXjg](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zNZczIgVXjg)

It amazes me how the guy with the stars and bars kept such a straight
face.\

[![the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155606)
| [February 10, 2013
01:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155775)

**216:**

You're painting a scenario in which the majority of people are lazy
mushrooms.

If that's true then the sad thing is that the Trots were right. Entryism
is the most effective method.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155523)
| [February 10, 2013
01:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155776)

**217:**

*Also: is job performance in policy-making posts to be evaluated on the
basis of successful policy-making, or the making of successful
policies?*

Several people have danced around this issue. You also to some degree.

How do you get everyone to agree on what a successful policy actually
is. Like we have now in the US where for many major initiatives of
either part 40% are totally for it, 40% are dead set against it, and 20%
will go along with whatever.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
CharlerK](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155191)
| [February 10, 2013
02:03](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155781)

**218:**

*I thought you were saying one of the problems is that politics has
become a profession. Would term limits not help with that? I would think
if every member of a party knows they will not be in office for very
long they would care less about re-election.*

In many ways this entire issue is related to size and the speed of
change.

In my city (Raleigh, NC, USA) the population has grown over the years:\
 Year Pop Percentage change from previous year.\
 1990 212,092 41.2%\
 2000 276,093 30.2%\
 2010 403,892 46.3%

Our city council consist of 8(?) locally elected officials paid not that
much and expected to really be just a few hours per week on the job.
They share one secretary, one lawyer, and the city manager reports to
them. The city manager is in charge of everything below him.

Guess what. They can't keep up. The job has just grown too complex for
them as a part time poorly paid position. Budget is around 1/2 Billion.
And lately some serious issues have come to light due to the local paper
finding things out. Basically the City Manager made some legal decisions
that seemed to follow the city council but it turned out were decidedly
unpopular.

So now the council is talking about pay that would allow them to get
deeper into details and a staff for each member to digest the fire hose
of information coming their way.

My point is that making the elected officials more amateur, AT ANY
LEVEL, doesn't seem to help things out.

Check out WHOOPS for more amateur fund in elected officials.\

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy\_Northwest](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_Northwest)

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
replied to [this comment from the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155775)
| [February 10, 2013
02:03](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155783)

**219:**

How many hours monthly do the people you know work on political issues?
Participation tends to be pretty low. Where I am, our primary is our
general for the most part, since we're a one party jurisdiction. Yet
only 17% of the eligible voters bothered to vote in the last primary. We
recently tried to pass a ballot initiative for something that's fairly
popular, but only had a few hundred people (out of a population of
630,000) willing to volunteer and collect signatures. The vast majority
of people wouldn't even stop to look at what the initiative was.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155769)
| [February 10, 2013
02:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155787)

**220:**

*the problem is that people want a system that will work without
requiring them to pay attention or exert any effort. You can't blame
democracy for human sloth.*

The problem isn't that people aren't trying to get the government to
work. I used to live in Washington, and a 30 mile commute regularly took
90 minutes because of all the people in the way who were going into town
to try to get the government to work. We're talking hundreds of
thousands of people, full time, before we even get around to touring the
state capitals.

The problem is that, for all that effort, nothing much actually happens.
I described my favorite theory to explain the difference between inputs
and output back in \#67.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155783)
| [February 10, 2013
02:31](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155788)

**221:**

This is where the Tea Party got it's start. People wanting to change
things so that the government left them alone because the wanted to be
left alone. (Except where they didn't.) It morphed, somewhat quickly,
into a strange destroy all government creature, later.

Most people want government to stay away except when called. But when
called show up fully prepared for anything. And of course it should cost
$0 when not called. :)

[![the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155781)
| [February 10, 2013
02:49](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155793)

**222:**

I composed a marvellous rebuttal to your post. It was somewhat long, but
well written, entertaining and informative.

Sadly, my "session expired" while I was typing it, which fact only
became apparent when I clicked submit.

Had I known that that was a risk, I'd have copied it before doing so. I
didn't, so I didn't and I'm buggered if I'm going to type it all out
again.

So, you'll have to take my word for it - you're utterly wrong and I have
a marvellous proof of that, but this comment box it too small to contain
it.

[![something](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2002)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
something | [February 10, 2013
05:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155827)

**223:**

Democracy is incompatible with liberty.

Read libertarian objections to democracy.\
 The basic idea is that it's a transition to totalitarianism.

[![ndgmtlcd](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1012)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
ndgmtlcd | [February 10, 2013
05:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155828)

**224:**

You're making, you're seeing no difference between federal systems and
centralized systems.

[![Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)
replied to [this comment from
something](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155827)
| [February 10, 2013
05:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155829)

**225:**

Everything is worse with libertarians.\

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155713)
| [February 10, 2013
06:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155845)

**226:**

I'm not sure beige governments keep the majority just happy enough, but
Charlie's dealt with that.

I'm also not sure a successful revolution really needs a majority to
start, even if it's in a traditional sense. It probably ends up with one
but the tipping point to serious threat and suddenly expanding to be a
popular, majority group is with some sizeable minority in most cases I
can think of.

[![Core](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1075)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Core](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1075)
replied to [this comment from
kedwards.author](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155218)
| [February 10, 2013
07:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155852)

**227:**

That's really got nothing to do with the random method, unless you
somehow randomly pick hundreds (or even thousands, if you want to mix
this in with getting the numbers high enough that reps are accessible)
narcissists.

Though, there's a bigger problem in that special interests with big
money might be even \*more\* powerful. Lobbying isn't about bribing the
politician anymore, its about bribing his staff and friends, and random
people off the street don't have any kind of defence mechanism against
that.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 10, 2013
10:23](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155883)

**228:**

el @ 225\
 A successful revolution needs about 1/3 of the pop. supporting it, and
at least half of the remainder sitting tight. Look at the first stage of
the slaveowners treasonous rebellion, in 1776.\
 See also David L @ 216

The other Rob @ 215 is horribly correct.\
 My local Lemmingcrat party has been entry-ised by islamicists (in
disguise, of course).\
 & @ 207 .. and HOW did those believers in Dark Ages camelherders' myths
get into place then?\
 Yup, entryism.

Chatham @ 213\
 One reason people can't be arsed to work on changing things is that
they don't think it will change anything, no matter how hard they work.

the other Rob @ 204\
 I'm fucking CERTAIN they've been successfully gamed!

Charlie @ 199\
 Agree re USSA, not so certain here, given that we do actually have, you
know, a coalition & the votes cast for that coalition was a majority.
[I'm NOT going into the disgrace of the constituency-boundaries
gerrymander, thank you] IF Camoron had got an absolute Majority, then
you would have been correct.\
 But it would also have been true of every government since 1951, with
the very possible (just) exception of 1997, wouldn't it?

Stina @ 186\
 The Guvmint=bad meme is loose here, now, too.\
 Exception, the usually much milder local libertarians have spotted that
the corporations are running guvmint & are against that, as well, which
I think is different form the US situation?

the other Rob @ 184\
 From a previous thread:\
 The phrase you are looking for is;\
 "Psychopathic Weasel" - origianlally applied to the wee Eck, I think.\

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155775)
| [February 10, 2013
10:28](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155886)

**229:**

> You're painting a scenario in which the majority of people are lazy
> mushrooms.

No, not at all - the people we ask who refuse to participate aren't
being lazy (we wouldn't bother asking people who were!). They just
firmly believe that politics is not that important and they have lots of
other things to do that are important.

Most of the time, when pressed, they will say that while they don't love
how the system works, they don't think it's all that bad.

So that's another dimension to why we get beige: it is something that
most people are **willing to accept**, even when many of them don't
really like it.

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
| [February 10, 2013
11:00](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155900)

**230:**

One relatively underrated anticipation book on the subject is "Soft
Gulag", by Yves Velan. Most of his point revolves around numbness and
passivity.

Interestingly, as soon as 1978, Velan gave airplane travel as an
illustration of crypto-totalitarian setting to come to the West, where
people do not as much travel as they are handled like some sort of human
fret (and this was long before the modern form of air travel, with its
industrial humiliation of passangers and where you can be whisked away
at the whim of any moron wearing a security badge).

More recently, French journalist Jean-Mars Manach has argued that "the
real risk is not Orwell, but Kafka" (
[http://bugbrother.blog.lemonde.fr/2011/04/13/le-vrai-danger-ce-n%E2%80%99est-pas-orwell-c%E2%80%99est-kafka/](http://bugbrother.blog.lemonde.fr/2011/04/13/le-vrai-danger-ce-n%E2%80%99est-pas-orwell-c%E2%80%99est-kafka/)
). And indeed, Guantanamo is at least as strong by its bureaucratic
entanglements as it is by its barbed wire.

[![Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Chatham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1834)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155787)
| [February 10, 2013
11:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155903)

**231:**

Yes, congressional staffers and State Department researchers don't spend
their time trying to push for radical change. They usually spend their
time doing the job they were hired to do. Likewise, despite the fact
that the US Postal Service has half a million employees "trying to get
the government to work," they've failed to get the government to enact
better legislation.

[![jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jessicayogini | [February 10, 2013
11:40](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155909)

**232:**

"For a while I've had the unwelcome feeling that we're living under
occupation by Martian invaders. (Not just here in the UK, but everyone,
everywhere on the planet.)"

Perhaps this is the awareness that we really could do so much better,
not merely that we somewhat used to.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
| [February 10, 2013
13:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155937)

**233:**

Charlesstross@199 I mean top insiders like Gorbachev can effect change,
unintentionally catalyze revolution

jay@200 Maybe being developed is direct what made\
 the oversupply, so it's not going back.

cahth3ik@201 Expert system users have always been developed like sports
stars. See Tammany Hall.

nestor@202 Except for the nonprofit parts that sounds like you are
proposing what we call "corporations"

charlestross@203 So these old institutions are being placated with power
because they have residual power?

theotherrob@204 People are accustomed. They wouldn't know what to do
with revolutionary change.

jay@205 Maybe there's a phase change where post scarcity leads to high
demand again.

davidl@206 So better lawmakers would solve this?

assufield@207 "Constituencies." Is there gerrymandering? If not, how
come?

theotherrob@208 What about proposition ballot initiatives decided by
referendum?

jessicayogini@209 So, an adjustment to the formula: they keep the
majority of the Power happy.

jessicayogini@210 It's got to be a continuum.

nestor@211 A thought: could royals run for office?

chatham @212 The uninformed aren't so much the majority as the decisive
minority.

chatham @213 Sometimes the TV is bad. And global warming is inevitable.
Brace for impact.

davidl@214 I'll take beige, then.

theotherrob@215 Don't know about Trotskyism. What's entryism?

davidl@216 So success in making policies comes from\
 making of successful policies. Sounds like democracy

davidl@217 Could they simplify, as manufacturers redesign products for
ease of production?

chatham@218 We trust our party because we think it makes good picks. So
we don't help it make picks.

jay@219 In an age of internet and nukes the government should be
physically more distributed

davidl@220 I want lower taxes and more services.

theotherrob@221 You only have to do that once, then you learn.

something @222 Rule is rule. Democracy is closer to\
 totalitarianism than is a hypothetical power vacuum.

ndgmticd@223 huh?

seanericfagan@224 see reply to 222 above.

el@225 see reply to 227 below. Though a slow boil\
 version could undermine based on other than firepower

core@226 I agree. Also, for accessibility, what about trickle up? Reps
elect higher echelon reps.

gregtingey@227 Historical numbers for revolutions applied with single
shot technology. See Syria.

assufield@228 So under Beige, the majority must be kept content, despite
not being the true masters?

cath31k@229 Oppression based on passivity implies a plan rather than
accidental drift.

chatham@230 That's because the postal service is part\
 of the executive branch. They don't make laws.

jessicayogini@231 That's the concept of social progress. But sometimes
we can go up dead ends.

[![Antonia T
Tiger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1791)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Antonia T
Tiger](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1791)
| [February 10, 2013
13:58](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155938)

**234:**

I think that some of you guys are part of the problem.

You are long-winded and boring.

The sound-bite, and the associated short attention span, are part of the
problem, but at least they're not boring. We want something a bit better
than elevator-pitch elections.

It would help if I could believe that politicians would deliver on their
election promises, but I am pretty sure which liar I am not voting for.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155937)
| [February 10, 2013
14:31](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155947)

**235:**

*Maybe there's a phase change where post scarcity leads to high demand
again.*

Demand, in economics, means the combination of wanting things and having
money to spend on things. Wants are abundant, so that part's easy.
Keynesian stimulus is about getting money to people so they can spend
it.

*In an age of internet and nukes the government should be physically
more distributed*

That's been tried, but not very successfully. Generally the distant
office winds up creating a Washington office to try to keep abreast of
the politics.

[![Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.krazykimchi.com)
[Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155937)
| [February 10, 2013
15:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155972)

**236:**

> Except for the nonprofit parts that sounds like you are proposing what
> we call "corporations"

This is correct, yes. I've been thinking about the "corporations as AI
made of people" analogy and wonder if we can't actually make human safe
corporations we certainly don't have much of a prayer of doing it with
real AI.

Encouraginly there do seem to be such a thing as a nonprofit
corporation, and you have such things as google's "do no evil" policy,
or Valve software's egalitarian hierarchy

> A thought: could royals run for office?

Certainly. They may need to abdicate first, Wallis Simpson rules may
apply.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
Core](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155852)
| [February 10, 2013
15:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155974)

**237:**

Actually, here's a simple problem with the random method:

Most politicians, at all levels, get routinely criticized for their
actions. Many get called evil, stupid, incompetent, corrupt, and/or
greedy whenever someone doesn't agree with their opinion. Often, they
get called these things to their faces, and they have to sit there and
take it. Sometimes they are even procedurally required to thank these
raving nutcases for their nasty and irrelevant comments.

Now, how many randomly chosen people could deal with for years without
breaking down in tears, going postal, or (if still sane) quitting and
walking away?

Politics IS a dirty occupation, even without talking about corruption.
It requires a high tolerance for awkward and unpleasant social
interactions, coupled with a high level of stamina (All day meetings?
Cool! Spend all evening fundraising? Cool!). Passion can substitute for
this in the short run (CF the Tea Party) but that really only lasts for
a few years before they burn out.

So no, I don't think a random lottery would work for choosing our
politicians. Most of the people chosen have no talent for and no desire
to do the job. This is one reason why so many don't get involved in
politics at all, even so much as voting.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from
heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155974)
| [February 10, 2013
16:09](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155980)

**238:**

Um, that's only a problem with the random method if the same structures
and processes of the current system continue.

If you have a random selection, there won't be party lines, at least not
as clearly, structures and so on. Things like PMQs could actually become
about questioning the PM than attempts at point scoring and playing to
the various back-benchers.

Who knows, it's even possible U-turns like Gove's recent set, could be
well presented and well received. In the current UK political situation
there's not a hope in hell of it being well received (by his own side or
the opposition). And although I don't actually agree with the "he wasn't
trying to improve education, he was trying to placate the far right of
his party" criticism, other criticisms of his policy - like there's a
lot of evidence he was talking rubbish about the impact of his ideas -
might even have been worked in \*before\* he presented them and we
wouldn't have wasted several months and a shed-load of money on mad
ideas. Jo(e) Random, Minister of Education, might look at a range of
evidence and make an informed decision, even if it's presented by the
same bureaucracy rather than a very ill-informed decision that does seem
to be inspired mainly by rosy memories of a non-existent golden age of
education and party divisions on the process of trying to improve it
from then.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 10, 2013
16:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155985)

**239:**

Nestor @ 236\
 "Could Royals run for office" ??\
 Well, members of the (then) hereditary House of Lords could, provide
they renounced title, permanently.\
 Look up Anthony Wedgewood Benn (Lord Stansgate)\
 Or for that matter, the previous Duke of Buccleugh, who stood, very
sucessfully as an MP, until HIS father died, & he had to move to the
Lords.

El @ 238\
 And what happens if the supposed professional bureaucracy are out to
lunch?\
 The current disatrous results at DafT (Oops, Dpearment for Tansport)
are a prominent case in point.\
 Or the multiple-manslaughter at Mid-Staffs hospitals, where the guilty
men have been promoted.....

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155985)
| [February 10, 2013
17:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156001)

**240:**

Oh, I'm not a proponent of the random system. I'm a proponent of
revolutionary change of systems. It starts simple... shoot everyone that
stands for office... and proceeds from there. To full, direct democracy
ideally.

Just pointing out that if we do have a randomly selected political
class, there's a decent chance we don't get that particular problem of
the old system perpetrated.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155980)
| [February 10, 2013
17:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156006)

**241:**

So, without parties, you're saying that you randomly get chosen, thrown
in with a room full of strangers, and get put to dealing with all the
tedious problems of the country, while everyone on the outside
criticizes you relentlessly for not getting the job done?

What could possibly go wrong?

Actually, the better question is: what could possibly go right?

All the solutions of such a government will be those that get people out
of that room as fast as possible, and the people who are better
politicians (e.g. those who listen, make alliances, and plan) will
dominate the government. Having ad hoc parties running the government
for each session probably won't result in anything citizens would want
to live under. Think government by *Survivor*, with everyone trying to
get off the island because there is nothing to win.

Worse, the government will be run (as it is in all term-limited states)
largely by the lobbyists, consultants, and bureaucrats, who understand
the issue, educate the politicians, and are totally outside the
electoral process. Having lived in such a system for years, I don't
think it's a good idea. Ignorant politicians seem to be particularly bad
at solving complex issues, and a lottery government guarantees that
almost every politician will be ignorant, alone, and looking for allies
at the start of each term.

H.L. Mencken had a quote that covered this admirably: "For every complex
problem, there is an answer that is simple, clear, and wrong." Whatever
your political stripe, you don't want your leaders and problem-solvers
making this mistake.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from
heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156006)
| [February 10, 2013
17:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156022)

**242:**

No, I'm saying I disagree with the criticism you gave of the system.
It's not my choice of system. I'm still in favour of revolutionary
change.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
| [February 10, 2013
18:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156023)

**243:**

"Corporations as AI made of people" would run software, ie bylaws, which
can be written to order, \
 such as for more shareholder involvement than picking between two
strangers for the board. \
 But benevolent corporations would be uncompetitive unless the
government mandated desired bylaw features across the board. Or just
created fiat stock to give itself a 25 percent stake in all
corporations.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from
Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155972)
| [February 10, 2013
18:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156024)

**244:**

Oops, 243 was @ Nestor

[![TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)
| [February 10, 2013
18:31](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156026)

**245:**

@178: \
 It's not disingenuous at all. How are the parties going to stop someone
from voting for who they want? When someone gets into the voting booth,
the parties can't control who they vote for.\
 ---\
 Each state has its own voting regulations. In my state, each county has
its own regulations. My county used to have big cardboard ballots and
felt-tip markers; you went into a curtained booth, marked your ballot,
and stuffed it into a slot in a box on the way out - it was a secret
ballot. If there was a question about the count, the ballots were
trucked to the local school, where blue-haired old ladies spread them
out on cafeteria tables and recounted them, out in the open for all to
see. As a former computer security wonk, I thoroughly supported the
system.

In 2008 the county electoral commission went to electronic voting
machines. These are suitcase-sized boxes supported on easels, with
touchscreen displays. You present your voter registration card to the
clerk, who then programs a "module". An election official walks with you
to the voting machine. He or she stands behind you, watching the screen,
to "help" you if needed. When you're done, he official walks the
"module" back to the clerk, who plugs it back into her laptop. You don't
get a receipt, nor is there any apparent paper tape made in the voting
machine.

Secret ballot? Really?

I'm going to skip over my lack of trust in the whole "electronic voting
machine" system, both in general and at the local level.

I make no secret of my political affiliation and who (or what, in the
case of bills) I vote for, but with the "secret" part of the ballot
gone, I can see how others might be pressured into voting against their
preferences.

[![TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[TRX](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1187)
| [February 10, 2013
18:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156028)

**246:**

@237: \
 Actually, here's a simple problem with the random method:\
 ---\
 The purpose of a random method isn't to achieve good government - for
whatever values of "good" you may prefer.

Its purpose is to obtain a true representation of the population, not to
ensure competence or affability.

If your population is composed of idiots, that's what you'll get.

[![ndgmtlcd](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1012)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
ndgmtlcd replied to [this comment from
heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156006)
| [February 10, 2013
19:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156032)

**247:**

You know, the classic answer to this objection of a lack of
knowledge/experience/fresh ideas in handling complex topics is that the
only thing politicians (or people chosen in a more or less random
way)really need is some good people skills.

All they have to know is how to handle, when to trust the experts who
give them the required wisdom/experience.

That way you could have term limits of 2 years and it would not matter.

I don't like this. I want the people I help elect to be able to read and
make up their minds themselves and have a lot more than people skills.

That's why I would not want a sort of random lottery or something like
the jury system, where they would test for people skills instead of jury
stuff.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
ndgmtlcd](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156032)
| [February 10, 2013
19:21](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156033)

**248:**

*All they have to know is how to handle, when to trust the experts who
give them the required wisdom/experience.*

That's the managerialist fallacy -- that because they know how to manage
processes, they can manage any given business without having to
understand the underlying details.

It is, frankly, rubbish. (See also "the first MBA President of the
United States".)

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 10, 2013
19:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156036)

**249:**

TRX @ 245\
 That is how it is still done here ....\
 And the count is done at the local Town Hall, & outside observers are
often REQUIRED - certainly the parties will have people on hand to cry
"foul!" or "recount!" if anything looks amiss....

[![jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jessicayogini replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155937)
| [February 10, 2013
19:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156043)

**250:**

"jessicayogini@231 That's the concept of social progress. But sometimes
we can go up dead ends."\
 You are right.\
 I think that the transition to a true knowledge-driven economy (not the
bansai-ed currently existing one) requires deep changes, we have failed
to make them, and as a result, there is a strong element of decay in
society. I think a lot of quite disparate phenomena are manifestations
of that decay or as you called it dead-end.\
 The distinction between a possibly random dead-end and a failure to
complete a necessary stage-transition seems useful.\

[![Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=147)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155937)
| [February 10, 2013
19:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156045)

**251:**

If you think that you have to have a cryptic one-sentence-or-less
response to dozens of comments at once, you are doing it wrong.\

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156022)
| [February 10, 2013
19:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156048)

**252:**

*I'm still in favour of revolutionary change.*

In the best case scenario, a revolution gives us a system just as flawed
as the one the last revolution gave us, because it's necessarily a
compromise between competing interests.

The worst case scenario gives us Oliver Cromwell with a Texan drawl.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from Sean Eric
Fagan](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156045)
| [February 10, 2013
20:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156049)

**253:**

Just an experiment. It was fun

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156048)
| [February 10, 2013
20:35](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156050)

**254:**

*The worst case scenario gives us Oliver Cromwell with a Texan drawl.*

That's not the worst case.

[I beseech you, in the bowels of Christ, think it possible that you may
be mistaken.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cromwell%27s_rule) Yes, that
was Oliver Cromwell. Dictator? Yes. War criminal in Ireland? By modern
standards, yes -- but by the standards of his time, that of the Thirty
Years War, the answer is more equivocal. But simple-minded totalitarian?
No, that hat doesn't fit.

The worst-case revolution-in-the-USA scenario I can think of probably
looks a bit like "The Handmaid's Tale", with added "1984" flavoured
special sauce on top. Certainly it's not as if there isn't a Christian
dominionist faction who seem to think THT is a road map, not a warning.
And it's not as if the tools to build a joined-up totalitarian Oceania
don't already exist there. But I hope and trust that's a low probability
worst-case outcome -- for much the same reason that the current system
is Beige.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156050)
| [February 10, 2013
21:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156054)

**255:**

I was using Cromwell as a prototypical Puritan dictator, which is
probably what the American South would wind up with if it gave itself a
chance. I surely agree that it could get much worse, especially now that
ubiquitous computers have solved the "who watches the watchmen" problem
that previous tyrannies have faced.

[![matt.muir](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2003)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
matt.muir | [February 10, 2013
21:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156058)

**256:**

You might want to check out Otto Kirchheimer's 'Catch-All' theory of
politics - arrived at in the 50s, it's a decent analogue to your
arguments above. Not everything that he predicted came to pass, but
enough to suggest that he was on to something:
[http://dare2.ubvu.vu.nl/bitstream/handle/1871/33745/157072.pdf?sequence=1](http://dare2.ubvu.vu.nl/bitstream/handle/1871/33745/157072.pdf?sequence=1)

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155937)
| [February 10, 2013
22:49](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156067)

**257:**

> "Constituencies." Is there gerrymandering? If not, how come?

Depends on your definitions - the correct answer is "sort of".
Constituency boundaries in the UK are adjusted by the politically
independent Boundaries Commission. However, the commission only provides
a recommendation, which parliament must approve (but not edit). Here's
the trick: net population migration in the UK is out of the
Labour-dominated urban areas and into the Tory-leaning suburbs. This
means that if boundaries remain unchanged, Labour's safe seats become
tiny geographical areas with relatively few people in them, all of which
vote Labour, while large Tory seats get gradually increasing numbers of
hard-line Labour voters moving into them. So the system automatically
accumulates bias towards Labour. (If you're wondering where the LDs are
in this equation - we aren't, because there's no equivalent of Labour's
unions or the Tory plutocrats.) Big surprise: when in government, Labour
tend to reject the commissions recommendations (although the commission
did eventually come up with some changes that were trivial enough to
pass). Every time the Tories get back into power, they try to jump the
boundaries back into their favour, and Labour starts screaming about
gerrymandering (which they would certainly never do, oh no).

> So under Beige, the majority must be kept content, despite not being
> the true masters?

More subtle than that. This system is self-correcting rather than an
outright attempt to placate the majority. When people are feeling
discontented in large numbers, they get more involved in politics and
start pulling things back in the other direction. When things start to
get better, people stop caring and pursue other interests.

Beige is therefore the stable equilibrium of the system over time - the
point at which people are just content enough not to do anything about
it.

In practice, interest waxes and wanes over the political cycle,
depending on how much stupid has happened recently. The Iraq war made
interest perk up. So did the economic crash. Now that the war's
basically over and the economy has proven itself to be in a slow,
boring, tiring recovery, people have gone back to what they were doing
before.

Note that this is not about what people vote for, because voting takes
no real effort. This is about what people are willing to spend real time
and money on fighting for.

[![IRMO](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1888)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1)
[IRMO](https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/ZTIxmv8Ho.udc1Ebs2iUBSdCbmAL#b5cb1")
| [February 10, 2013
23:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156068)

**258:**

Some years back I read of a Danish program where they conscript citizens
in lieu of jury duty and commission legislative white papers from them.
I don't know if it's still happening, but it's another way to bypass the
beige.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156048)
| [February 11, 2013
00:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156074)

**259:**

The system is, IMO and OGH's opinion, currently broken. There are fine
details of differences about how I see that brokenness to those listed
above but that becomes a tract or two in its own right, so I'll pass -
it's close enough.

Part of the failure mode we're in precludes the system repairing itself.
We have bigger differences of opinion about why it won't but we seem to
agree it won't, so again I'll pass on the details of where I somewhat
disagree with OGH.

I reject your hypothesis that if we have a revolution the best we can
hope for is the same old mess. We can put together a system that, to us,
appears to be strong, vibrant and safeguard against the abuses we
current see or can imagine. It will ultimately fail, granted, as our
descendants learn how to game it until they game it into a failure
state. If we do a good job of setting up the new system that will likely
take a few centuries. If we do a poor job, probably a few years. For
some range of moderately acceptable jobs, a few decades. At which point
we do it again (or quite possibly in the case of those that last only a
few years have it imposed on us after losing a war).

Granted, there are some really shitty outcomes if it's a bad set of
rules. Gilead has fallen by the time of the epilogue to "The Handmaid's
Tale" remember, and is a historical curiosity. Oceania is certainly
susceptible to revolution, Big Brother or no. And the real USSR crumbled
and fell apart. Not, it appears, into something better yet admittedly,
but Putin will die sometime if it takes that long.

But you know what? I'm willing to risk a few years, even a few decades
of crap to get out of this current failure mode in the hope that we'll
get an outcome that gives us at least many decades if not a few
centuries of good governance. Bland politicians and beige dictatorship
be damned. If we don't act to try and fix this problem, we'll just add
it to the rest we leave for the next generation or the next.

[![the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1344)
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156074)
| [February 11, 2013
00:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156076)

**260:**

"For some range of moderately acceptable jobs, a few decades. At which
point we do it again..."

This.

Here's a personal example as to why. After many decades of failure, I
have finally managed to stop smoking cigarettes, with the aid of one of
those electronic vaporisers (or e-cigs). It turns out that my triumph
may be short lived, however, as the FDA (at the apparent behest of its
masters in Big Pharma) is preparing to regulate the e-cig business into
oblivion.

When a political system actually sets out to give the electorate
emphysema, heart disease and even fucking cancer, just because it
generates revenue for some corporations then I think it's fair to say
that it has been gamed to the point where cleansing with fire might
appear to be preferable.

[![jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jessicayogini replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156050)
| [February 11, 2013
01:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156094)

**261:**

I think The Hunger Games actually is a higher probability worst case
scenario. \
 The threat posed by Christianists is hyped to keep American liberals
fearful and bought into the system, just the way that the threat posed
by Islamicists is used to keep conservatives hyperventilating. \

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156074)
| [February 11, 2013
02:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156149)

**262:**

I'll just say two things:

1: Revolutions are difficult if not impossible to control. The
revolution that wound up putting Saddam in power was started by
idealists with good intentions. Ditto Stalin.

2: Modern America is relatively novel in that most Americans literally
can't feed themselves without the system functioning. A revolution that
would be inconvenient to the nation of subsistence farmers we once were
would kill tens of millions today, just from disruptions in logistics.

I agree that the present situation is bad, even kind of terrible in its
way, but I simply don't think you understand how badly a revolution
could go. Revolution is like setting a terminal cancer patient on fire;
the fire will kill the cancer, but overall improvement is unlikely.

[![ndgmtlcd](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1012)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
ndgmtlcd replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156033)
| [February 11, 2013
03:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156170)

**263:**

"All they have to know is how to handle, when to trust the experts who
give them the required wisdom/experience.

That's the managerialist fallacy -- that because they know how to manage
processes, they can manage any given business without having to
understand the underlying details.

It is, frankly, rubbish."

Well, yes, I more than agree with you in this. But the thing is that
nearly all the directors, DGs, middle managers XO level managers, (in
private enterprise as well as governments) VPs, etc, etc all deeply
believe this rubbish.

This belief is what drives the beige behind the scenes. How do you
denounce it other than by saying "utter rot". How do you explain the
managerial fallacy in the light of the beige problem.

[![Don](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2004)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/_Fp0OicDlZ4541Ol8wjp.YFZWNxu44jBGRA-#160f4)
[Don](https://me.yahoo.com/a/_Fp0OicDlZ4541Ol8wjp.YFZWNxu44jBGRA-#160f4 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/_Fp0OicDlZ4541Ol8wjp.YFZWNxu44jBGRA-#160f4")
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155175)
| [February 11, 2013
03:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156193)

**264:**

Charlie: \>\> The correct solution is one that makes gerrymandering
impossible ..

There is a relatively easy fix for that.

Gerrymandering is basically a hack to make votes for one party count a
bit more than votes for other parties. It works because a winner is
winner-takes-all. That is, he/she gets the political power attached to
the votes for them, and also the political power attached to votes
against them.

So, change the system so that the winner only gets the political power
of the votes \*for\* them. When an elected (as my elected friend calls
them) votes "yes" on a bill, don't increment the vote count by one.
Increment it by 43,000 (or however many votes they got).

Hey, computers are good at arithmetic. And in the event of a power
outage, bring out an abacus :-) This is not a complicated algorithm.

As I understand it, this would neutralize all benefit that successful
gerrymandering gives. And it also removes the need for "the Charlie
Stross Party" to have coat-tails.

[![Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.krazykimchi.com)
[Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)
replied to [this comment from
Don](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156193)
| [February 11, 2013
07:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156399)

**265:**

If you're going that route you might as well cut the middle man and run
a direct democracy with constant ongoing polling (The internet has given
us the infrastructure that makes this practical) for every issue.

You'd get very low voter participation per issue but those who did would
be highly motivated, as they'd be voting for stuff they cared about.

[![Don](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2004)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/favicon_yahoo.png)](https://me.yahoo.com/a/_Fp0OicDlZ4541Ol8wjp.YFZWNxu44jBGRA-#160f4)
[Don](https://me.yahoo.com/a/_Fp0OicDlZ4541Ol8wjp.YFZWNxu44jBGRA-#160f4 "https://me.yahoo.com/a/_Fp0OicDlZ4541Ol8wjp.YFZWNxu44jBGRA-#160f4")
| [February 11, 2013
08:04](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156418)

**266:**

No, the ideas aren't connected.

I don't think highly of live participation. If you disagree, it's on
your head to explain why it would work any better than Internet polls
do.\

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 11, 2013
08:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156450)

**267:**

@ 261\
 Slight problem, undoubtedly exploited to the full by the beige
dictator/string-pullers.\
 The threat from xtian dominionists in the USSA is real (though small)\
 The threat from the islamicists (Nazis re-born, in actual fact) is also
real & very dangerous, if only because of appeasement.\
 How convenient for the puppet masters?\
 I thus see how über-conspiracy theories arise.\
 Can you?

Jay @ 262 [1]\
 You forgot, also: Robespierre, Ayatollah Khomeini, those to the even
further out than old Noll (Scotland actually had these nutters in charge
(euw), Mao Zhedong, & the great majority of revolutions, in fact.\
 General rule: revolutions fail, but when they succeed, they usually
fail even worse!\
 Cases like Britain 1659-88, US 1781 are the EXCEPTION, not the rule.
France only got a semi-stable guvmint as a result of a catastrophic
military defeat in 1870-1, remember.\
 [2] Exactly

@ 263\
 Circular argument (though valid) so turning it around ...\
 *How do you explain the beige problem in the light of the managerial
fallacy*?\
 Except, just, perhaps, the "managerial fallacy" is at least recognised
as such by peole like us.\
 How long before this trickles UP the syatem towards the "top" & changes
occur?\
 Another 20 years? [ i.e. as new people who realise the mistakes get,
eventualy promoted??? ]

[![cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1747)
| [February 11, 2013
09:34](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156483)

**268:**

The impression of "beigeness" is relative to a middle-ground that can
drift. The USA or Israel, for instance, have significantly shifted their
entire political spectrum to the right in the last 20 years. Different
countries have different average attitudes, up to the possibility of
"far-right-wing countries" -- like South Africa during the Appartheid,
where the electorate plebiscited policies regarded as outlandish or even
criminal in other countries.

Therefore, we should consider separately the notions of democracy and of
"Rechtsstaat" (rule of law). It is quite possible to have a perfectly
democratically elected government that violates legal standards, with or
without appearance of legality. The possibility of keeping appearances
of legality is why the health of the "Rechtsstaat" should be measured
against international standards such as Human Rights or United Nations
benchmarks. For instance, when a practice is universally regarded to be
torture except in your country, it is time for some serious
introspection.

One of the reasons why I feel very unconfortable when high-office
criminal behaviour goes unpunished ("looking forward" attitude) or
unexplained ("truth and reconciliation"-style), is that it leaves
criminals free to engage in sedition. High-office criminals are experts
at gaming bureaucracy and law, and thus are very apt at shifting
national consensus, gradually leading the country to a darker and darker
beige.

[![Red
Deathy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1501)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://impossiblist.blogspot.com)
[Red
Deathy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1501)
| [February 11, 2013
10:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156532)

**269:**

Two points:\
 1) [Hotelling applies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hotelling%27s_law),
and in a stable polity both parties will try to be identical (within the
ambit of their base coalition).\
 2) Democracy is conservative: how often do you change your mind? Most
people will stay with their party of choice, with only that mysterious
band of swing voters changing. Real change comes from
franchise/demographic change.\

[![Graham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2005)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Graham](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2005)
| [February 11, 2013
10:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156539)

**270:**

I'm coming to this thread late having just skimmed the comments, so
apologies if I ramble somewhat.

One I always wonder when this site starts talking politics is, how many
people have met their local MP or been to one of their local political
parties meetings? At least one of above has and gave us a bit of an
insight into the Lib-Dems selection. Personally I'd have to say that
strictly speaking i've not, but in both my previous residences I did.
Given my experiences in both Edinburgh North and Leith and Livingston I
have to say you lot have no clue how our politcal parties work - a lot
of them would, i'm sure, LOVE to be the well organised machine
described, but at the local level they are so not. The key fact often
missed is - if apathy about politics effects our democratic process
nationally, what do you think is does to our local political parties
internal decision making? Remember that although candidates may be
screened centrally they will get voted for locally. The people who have
commented on this post would probably be enough to swing a selection
vote for a constituency if the candidate was remotely sensible. Anyone
could probably get an internal job (the first step to selection) just by
turning up and being able to speak. If you happen to be female It's
likely you'd get from branch to constituency level just by volunteering
(in Labour delegate count has to be gender neutral and there are rarely
enough women who want to do it, leaving people who don't really want to
go to the extra meeting getting pushed into it). Put a decent of effort
in around an election and you can get yourself onto the council
candidate list. This is how those young politics students do it.

Also remember that the apathy is not evenly distributed by age. The
older people still vote. I wonder if the 'beigification' is not partly
down to that trend. Also remember said old people REALLY dislike the
trend towards apathy. A non-apathetic candidate who is roughtly in the
right (or in this case, left) place already has a bunch of votes.

And finally, remember that the parties are full of people who really
believe in what the party used to stand for. The compromises made to
become electable and then the various decisions (i'm looking at you
invasion of Iraq) might have driven many people to leave, but not all
those who disagreed. (although here my experience may be slightly
biased, since the one I have most experience with (EN&L) had an MP who
polled his local party plus others and then voted against Iraq.

So you want to recapture politics? You don't need to start a fringe
party, just join the mainstream party most closely traditionally aligned
with your views along with a few of your keen mates and with luck you'll
have far more influence on councillors/MSP/MP of your own soon enough.
Pretty sure that would still be doable for Labour after their time in
power (opposition is much easier for parties). Almost certainly going to
be true of the Lib Dems soon. Of course once everyone starts doing it
we've fixed one of the major root causes of problems with our system and
the parties do their job again instead of being partly cored husks, far
short of the manpower needed to really campaign.

And finally, just one more thing. For those who disagree i'll get my
reply in first. Hove you personally met your elected representatives and
actually talked to them? Or are your opinions formed from the media?
Because if I was an oligarch/plutocrat media mogul the first thing I'd
do is target the politicians who are SUCH an easy target -the very
nature of their job means they upset people all the time.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156036)
| [February 11, 2013
11:11](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156546)

**271:**

I've been one of those "Count Agents" (allowed if not required under the
relevant legislation, the "Representation of the People Act" if anyone
wishes to look it up).

Normally we, or the count tellers, would raise queries about whether or
not a specific ballot paper was "spoilt" (basically, if someone had
voted for 2 or more candidates, or marked their paper with something
other than an "X" character). A recount is **required** if the margin of
victory is low (for a parliamentary election, I think it's under 1\_000
votes, and a typical turnout would have mid 40s thousands of votes
polled.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from
Graham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156539)
| [February 11, 2013
11:26](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156553)

**272:**

"how many people have met their local MP or been to one of their local
political parties meetings?"

I was a Democratic party county delegate in 1992. \
 Had decided to be a Democrat after reading a history text book for
Houston Community College. That was cool. Went to a precinct meeting on
primary night just to check it out and they said, "we got x number of
votes for Jerry Brown but we don't have anybody to be a delegate." So I
went and voted for Jerry Brown but Bill Clinton won. Whatever, it was
just for a lark as you would say in the UK.

As for meeting my representative, why would I want to meet someone whose
whole thing will be "give me money"? I sent John Kerry's campaign a
month's wages in 2004 and they sent me almost daily emails asking for
money all the way up until I sent Hillary Clinton's campaign money in
2008, when the source of the emails switched, but the message stayed the
same. I'm sure my congressman is just the same. "Feed me!" No more, I'll
tell you what. Never another dime for a politician. I'll vote, maybe be
a delegate again, but that's it.

Oh and I'll put a sign in my yard and a bumper sticker on my car. Have
one for [my
Senator](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirsten_Gillibrand#Political_positions)
, who won with a 75 percent landslide and never asked for a dime.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 11, 2013
11:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156558)

**273:**

Grahm @ 270\
 I left the Lemmingcrats, once I realised, after about 3 years, that
they were just as big a bunch of hypocritical lying shits as the other
two.\
 I have met my current MP - she's probably quite good - certainly
locally.\
 I met her long-serving predecessor several times.\
 And the previous two, both of whom were uttery, totally useless
(neither lasted, which might say something).\
 I'm still utterly pissed-off with the whole thing.\
 Now what?\
 I have a lot of sympathy for some of the policies of UKIP ... but they
seem to have got christianity, euw.\
 Greens? Forget it - they want no nuclear power & want to abolish The
Corporation, which indicates that they are truly mad.\
 The others have policies & personnel I wouldn't go near with somonene
else's.\
 Please note that I think of myself as a very socially liberal left-wing
conservative, in Brit terms; but that is in a framework of my
upbringing, and the Overton window has moved around a bit in the past
few years, hasn't it?

paws @ 271\
 I know - I've been there for council elections - yes \_ I've actually
done the Heinlein thing & stood for public office [precisely ONCE]

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
TRX](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156026)
| [February 11, 2013
11:39](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156559)

**274:**

*In 2008 the county electoral commission went to electronic voting
machines. ... You don't get a receipt, nor is there any apparent paper
tape made in the voting machine.*

I'm hoping that these electronic voting concepts are a fad. Hopefully
lasting not as long as punch card voting.

Here we use OCR paper ballots. As you said, if there's a issue, the blue
haired ladies can spread them out on the big tables and count them by
hand. But in the absence of issues our country wide results (900K pop)
are known about an hour after the polls close.

[![Red
Deathy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1501)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://impossiblist.blogspot.com)
[Red
Deathy](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1501)
| [February 11, 2013
11:50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156567)

**275:**

BTW, just to make a pitch for a form of democracy between representative
and direct: if the Old Chartist demand (and the Pennsylvania 1776
constitutional practice) of Annual parliaments applied, things could be
different, since you could throw the scoundrels out, knowing you
wouldn't have to fave five years of the other lot, and each party would
stand on its precise programme of legislation 9unlike now, where they
say they can't tell what legislation they'll have to bring in in three
years time); but you wouldn't have to have referendums on every blasted
decision...

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from the other
rob](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155793)
| [February 11, 2013
11:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156568)

**276:**

*I composed a marvellous rebuttal to your post. It was somewhat long,
but well written, entertaining and informative.*

Sadly, my "session expired" while I was typing it, which fact only
became apparent when I clicked submit\
 ...\
 So, you'll have to take my word for it - you're utterly wrong and I
have a marvellous proof of that, but this comment box it too small to
contain it.

Uh, no thanks.

Same happened to me on another comment. I've started doing a select all
and copy before posting. :)

[![akicif](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1142)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
akicif replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155112)
| [February 11, 2013
11:58](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156570)

**277:**

Which bit? The whole claim of America as the most White-Hatted of the
very best of the never-doing-a-thing-wrong-ever Good Guys....

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 11, 2013
12:19](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156577)

**278:**

Breaking news ...\
 At least one [evil old
bastard](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-21411304) in the dictatorship
(& not so Beige, he) is going soon.\
 Let the partying commence!\
 One problem, to quote JRRT: "That we should seek to cast him down & put
no-one in his place has not occurred to him"\
 But that is what we do want, I think?

[![Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.krazykimchi.com)
[Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)
replied to [this comment from
Don](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156418)
| [February 11, 2013
12:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156587)

**279:**

> I don't think highly of live participation. If you disagree, it's on
> your head to explain why it would work any better than Internet polls
> do.

It's a bit more democracy than most people are willing to contemplate,
certainly. And more revolutionary than I'd be willing to risk in the
short term. But comparing it to internet polls is disingenuous, has
anyone ever tried internet voting with the level of authentication
required and made it binding to anything remotely meaningful?

I'd be more confident about having to vote individual issues on a
regular basis through a secure website than pressing a screen on some
Diebold creature and then having to live with the results for the next 4
years.

I have no particular preference for slips of paper and little blue
haired ladies doing manual counts. It all ends up as numbers on a
computer anyway.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from
cahth3iK](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155729)
| [February 11, 2013
14:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156598)

**280:**

" I shudder to think of what will happen if people like John Yoo or
Douglas Feith manage to fall on their feet, build successful carrers and
make a comeback in 20 or 30 years."

I do, as well. A whole crop of bottom-level schmucks from the Bush
administration will be mid-level guys in the next GOP administration; a
whole crop of mid-level guys will be the high-level guys.

And they'll have the advantage of many, many civil servants who became
compromised during the Bush administration; many of the political
appointees will know which civil servants did what, and be able to use
that against him.

And we've set the political, judicial and media precedents that they
should get away with things.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155788)
| [February 11, 2013
14:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156605)

**281:**

"This is where the Tea Party got it's start. People wanting to change
things so that the government left them alone because the wanted to be
left alone. (Except where they didn't.) It morphed, somewhat quickly,
into a strange destroy all government creature, later."

As I've pointed out, before, this desire manifested in the physical
world in November, 2008, right after their party got it's \*ss kicked.
Before then, they were quite OK with a big, strong government.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156605)
| [February 11, 2013
14:54](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156611)

**282:**

Ah, no. It was going before then. But if you didn't rub shoulders with
non liberals on a regular basis you would not have seen it.

My work has me interacting socially with almost all flavors of US
political adherents. It can be interesting to hear a rant by someone in
the area of Charlie's politics in the morning and someone who would be
considered an Obama birther in the afternoon.

Then while my daughter was in OZ for 3 weeks last month she got unloaded
on by a non trivial number of people about how 9/11 was a setup by the
US government plus more interesting things. This was mostly a college
through 20 something crowd.

As to getting this but kicked in 08, I know a lot of people who tend to
vote R who thought it was a deserved but kicking.

[![Tim
Holmes](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2006)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](https://sites.google.com/site/democraticglobe/)
[Tim
Holmes](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2006)
| [February 11, 2013
15:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156617)

**283:**

I agree. I have been worried about this for a long time and thus have
been constructing a POSITIVE alternative to complaining about the way
things work in politics. For two years I've been working on a model for
a global democracy that is intended to be immune to centralization and
directly connected to the inherent human moral sensibility. (The
dedicated site is temporarily down, but) please check it out the
alternative site at:\

[https://sites.google.com/site/democraticglobe/](https://sites.google.com/site/democraticglobe/)

I'd love to have this idea taken over for development by a group
dedicated to the concept of power rooted in the people.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 11, 2013
16:17](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156636)

**284:**

Tim Holmes @ 283\
 *the inherent human moral sensibility*\
 What PLANET are you on?\
 The inherent human moral snsibility that lets Taliban & Boko Haram &
the Inquisition & Jean Calvin & Kim Il-Sung & Adolf & & & ... running
around loose, with millions of followers?

[![ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)
replied to [this comment from
heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155974)
| [February 11, 2013
17:06](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156650)

**285:**

Your post seems to lack imagination. (Unusual for you :)

No law prohibits a politician confronted with a raving lunatic from
saying "You are an ass!" and walking away. The only reason they rarely
do so is because they are concerned about re-election, or at the very
least about party image. Randomly selected representative would have no
such worry -- in fact, no real reason to waste time with public directly
at all. No need for exhaustive fundraising and such.

There are real problems with representation by lot, but "having to be
polite to assholes" is not one of them.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156650)
| [February 11, 2013
17:53](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156659)

**286:**

Who needs imagination when you've got reality? I'm not the only person
in my family who has testified at legislative hearings. This isn't a
hypothetical to me, and if you think it's unimaginative, you probably
haven't had a similar experience.

To put it very simply, the reason most politicians can't say "You're an
ass!" and walk away is that their job requires them to take hours of
public testimony every week. MOST of that testimony boils down to
variations on "You are an ass if you don't do (X)!" In fact, I try to
make an impact by sweet reason, rather than appeals to base emotion,
just to stand out by contrast.

It's normal in contentious hearings to see tears, shouts, thumping the
podium, frustrated businessman saying they'll be ruined, and all other
sorts of real and theatrical performances.

Throughout all this, the politicians don't leave their seats. If they
did, I think they'd be in violation of various laws (in California, I
think the Brown Act on open meetings may be part of this), and they'd
certainly shut down the meeting if there wasn't a quorum listening.

That's the basis for my admiration for them. I don't particularly like
most of the politicians I watch, but I have to admit that I'd be
incapable of doing their job, much less finding it satisfying in any
way. I'm pretty sure that I'm normal in this regard, which is why I
think lottery-model politics is such a bad idea.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156650)
| [February 11, 2013
17:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156660)

**287:**

*No law prohibits a politician confronted with a raving lunatic from
saying "You are an ass!" and walking away. The only reason they rarely
do so is because they are concerned about re-election, or at the very
least about party image.*

Existence proof of this principle: [Gordon Brown's bigoted
woman](http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/apr/28/gordon-brown-bigoted-woman)
quip -- mike was hot, prime minister ended up on all the TV channels
effectively dismissing a voter's concerns about immigration as
"bigoted".

Well yes, she *was* a bigot, IMO. Unfortunately it was a hot-button
issue in a very tight general election. Tight enough that it may well
have been the sound-bite that cost Labour a skin-of-the-teeth fourth
term in office ...

[![https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawkhqNwupf5SV3SbmWfKf2SXvMI0WLKaQzk](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1279)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawkhqNwupf5SV3SbmWfKf2SXvMI0WLKaQzk
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155092)
| [February 11, 2013
18:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156663)

**288:**

To increase the voting turn-out, you have to make parties listen very
intently to the electorate. To make them listen, hit them in the pocket.

As things stand in the UK, the Tory Party can subsist on a few large
business donors, the Labour Party on a few Union donations, and who
knows what for the Lib-Dems. The key here is that the parties themselves
are only beholden to the whims of a very few donors; appease these
people and the rest of the electorate can be ignored until election
time.

To fix this, greatly reduce the amount of money that any one donor (be
it a person or a company or a union) may each give per annum to as
little as £500. This then forces the parties to listen to a very great
many people in order to survive; it also hugely restricts the amount of
political party machinery that may be accommodated.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawkhqNwupf5SV3SbmWfKf2SXvMI0WLKaQzk](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156663)
| [February 11, 2013
19:16](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156689)

**289:**

At this point, I'd suggest that one person can spin off 500 (or 5000)
corporate "persons" faster than the law can catch up with it. The
general problem is that it takes several election cycles to figure out
how to fix any particular loopholes in the current campaign laws, so
it's a Red Queen race between laws and fundraising tricks.

Personally, I wouldn't be surprised if the Citizens United Ruling gets
pitched sometime soon. It didn't result in a Republican landslide, and
if it doesn't empower any one bloc, why let it stand?

As for politicians listening to voters, that's what they do at all
levels. It's basic politics that if a lot of people are worked up enough
to complain about something to a politician (which is very
inconvenient), then there's political power moving. Like the magicians
in fantasy novels, most adept politicians are very sensitive to the way
the power moves, whether they can take advantage of it or not.

The other thing to remember is that most people get into politics
because they want to make things better for other people (by their
definition of "better"). It's hard to do that if you never listen to
what people want and need.

[![ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)
replied to [this comment from
heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156689)
| [February 11, 2013
19:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156695)

**290:**

**The other thing to remember is that most people get into politics
because they want to make things better for other people (by their
definition of "better"). It's hard to do that if you never listen to
what people want and need.**

But very easy if you never wanted any of that, and were forcibly
drafted.

You are making a "planet of the hats" fallacy -- "If legislators were
randomly drafted instead of elected and [i]everything were the same[/i]
they would go crazy/could not function". But everything else would not
be the same -- [i]could[/i] not be. For a random draft to work at all,
draftees would have to be shielded from the public, for exactly same
reasons you stated.

It's a bit like people saying "Significant life extension, let alone
immortality, cannot happen because it would bankrupt Social Security".
Goes without saying that significant life extension would by necessity
force a change in retirement practices.

BTW, I am not saying that legislation by lot is a particularly good
idea. But particular problems you listed would be a no-brainer to take
care. Most legislators (or equivalents) throughout history did not need
to listen to insults, except perhaps from each other.

[![Charlie
Stross](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-2-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/)
[Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2)
replied to [this comment from
heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156689)
| [February 11, 2013
20:51](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156706)

**291:**

H, one thing the UK does **better** than the USA is election spending.
We don't have caps on donations. Instead, we have caps on expenditure --
*really strict* caps, enforced by independent auditors, with criminal
charges and serious prison time awaiting a candidate who over-spends on
their campaign.

Upshot: an entire general election campaign, with 650 seats in play
among 3 major parties and 3-6 minor ones, costs *less* than the campaign
of a single candidate for Congress.

I will agree that not capping donations to parties is a problem -- it
means day-to-day party operations can be bankrolled by a few rich
donors, leading to capture by special interest factions -- but the cap
on campaign costs is critically important.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156695)
| [February 11, 2013
22:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156720)

**292:**

Wow, so instead of putting random people up in the council chairs and
making them do the work of democracy--government by the people, you're
going to hide them in a guarded palace where no one can talk to them,
and expect them to do a better job?

Seriously?

The situation you describe, where a few people, picked by chance, are
put in charge of a lot of money and power, is the classic setup for an
oligarchic dictatorship followed by a revolution. There are a lot of
examples of that in history, and they never end well for those in power.
Generally they end even worse for those they rule, too.

Then again, you said you wanted a revolution, so I guess that's why this
seems like a good idea to you.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from
Graham](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156539)
| [February 11, 2013
23:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156726)

**293:**

> So you want to recapture politics? You don't need to start a fringe
> party, just join the mainstream party most closely traditionally
> aligned with your views along with a few of your keen mates and with
> luck you'll have far more influence on councillors/MSP/MP of your own
> soon enough. [...] Almost certainly going to be true of the Lib Dems
> soon.

I can tell you offhand that in almost all of the country we actively
welcome and encourage such participation, and wish more people would do
it - and have done so for decades. It's a running joke inside the party
that if you show up to a meeting for the first time, somebody will ask
you if you want to stand for the council. It's funny because it's true.

I have never personally encountered a fringe party that existed for any
reason other than one or more of the key individuals involved being
completely barking mad. They may exist, but I haven't seen one.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawkhqNwupf5SV3SbmWfKf2SXvMI0WLKaQzk](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156663)
| [February 11, 2013
23:33](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156732)

**294:**

> As things stand in the UK, the Tory Party can subsist on a few large
> business donors, the Labour Party on a few Union donations, and who
> knows what for the Lib-Dems. The key here is that the parties
> themselves are only beholden to the whims of a very few donors;
> appease these people and the rest of the electorate can be ignored
> until election time.

I can only talk in broad terms about LD funding (I happen to know the
details, but like all major parties they're confidential for obvious
reasons - what I'm saying here is in the public record for anybody who
can be bothered to look). However: we're different from the other two
here. We run on bugger-all money by comparison and a heck of a lot more
sweat. What money we do get comes in small amounts from individual
donors.

I'm trying as hard as I can to avoid bringing actual party politics into
this thread, but on your last point, I shall merely note that here in my
borough, we're out campaigning right now, in winter in year 2 of a 4
year electoral cycle, and the other two parties aren't.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 11, 2013
23:39](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156735)

**295:**

@ 294\
 That's because the Lemmingcrats are screwed - & what's worse, they've
screwed themselves!

[![mpearle017](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2010)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
mpearle017 | [February 12, 2013
01:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157004)

**296:**

I'd recommend Mencius Moldbug's take on this.

[http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.co.nz/2013/02/charles-stross-discovers-cathedral.html](http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.co.nz/2013/02/charles-stross-discovers-cathedral.html)

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156706)
| [February 12, 2013
03:44](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157058)

**297:**

*we have caps on expenditure -- really strict caps, enforced by
independent auditors, with criminal charges and serious prison time
awaiting a candidate who over-spends on their campaign.*

How are issue campaigns handled? This is the big loop hole that drives a
huge amount of election spending in the US. Ads that never mention a
candidate or party but do advocate strongly for a position that aligns
with a candidate or party.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 12, 2013
08:33](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157221)

**298:**

Actually, it has just got really horrible.\
 [We are about to introduce secret courts, with secret information,
never shown to the
defence](http://mikesivier.wordpress.com/2013/02/11/uk-police-state-moves-a-step-closer-to-your-door/)\
 Yes, really!\
 Totalitarian Britain, in the next session, unless something is done.\
 NOT so beige a dictatorship, huh?

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157058)
| [February 12, 2013
08:48](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157229)

**299:**

I honestly don't remember an issue campaign, at least not in our
broadcast media. I suspect there isn't one in our print media. There may
have been one or more on billboards and the like that I've missed but I
don't know of any.

Our broadcast media are tightly regulated to be politically impartial
and even-handed. Even the Murdoch owned Sky News (the closest,
structurally and in ownership terms, we get to something like Fox News)
lives up to that. During the build up to an election even stricter rules
are enforced. For example, you in broadcast shows you can't ask about
local issues unless all the candidates for the affected constituency are
present and you must provide balanced air time to all parties (that's
balance on some weird formula where the big parties get the same, and
the smaller ones get some but it's standard and agreed across the
parties pretty well.) If they carried an issue campaign it would almost
certainly get both the electoral authorities and the broadcast
authorities looking closely at them and the latter have the power to
revoke a broadcast license so the station would be taken off air. It's
also worth noting the most watched and listened stations in the UK are
all BBC ones that don't carry adverts anyway.

The print media don't necessarily carry them, may not be able to, but
our print media are all pretty much politically aligned anyway. I
believe they're careful about what they carry in terms of adverts but
they're full of editorials largely supporting a party. Not sure those
looking to bend the rules would consider it a good return. It might also
be banned but I don't know.

As more and more things happen online that might change. Blogging and
the like is covered by defamation laws and most of the others that apply
to the written word (we don't have an enshrined right to freedom of
speech either). But bloggers can certainly write about issues and if
Charlie decides to blog on either side of the independence issue for
example, I'm sure he'd be pretty widely read. Although not necessarily
by a lot of people that would have a vote in the referendum.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawkhqNwupf5SV3SbmWfKf2SXvMI0WLKaQzk](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156663)
| [February 12, 2013
09:13](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157240)

**300:**

\#288 - I agree the point; perhaps we should combine the ideas, and then
control the donation cap proportionate to the turnout at the last
General Election?

\#291 - As Charlie says, with the note that one MP near him (name and
seat presently elude me) had the result of their election overturned,
and **criminal** charges brought against them for an election expenses
fraud; Yes, we take it that seriously as a nation.

[![decicco.barry](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1198)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
decicco.barry replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156611)
| [February 12, 2013
13:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157318)

**301:**

"Ah, no. It was going before then. But if you didn't rub shoulders with
non liberals on a regular basis you would not have seen it."

\
 I must have missed the large public protests during before Nov'08.

And I do have right-wing relatives, including Birthers and Tea Party
protesters.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 12, 2013
13:46](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157329)

**302:**

@ 301\
 What do you do with insane ("Birther") relatives?\
 What's the procedure for the US equivalent of sectioning under the
Mental Health Acts?\
 /Snark

[![gravelbelly22](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1242)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
gravelbelly22 replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156660)
| [February 12, 2013
13:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157331)

**303:**

*Existence proof of this principle: Gordon Brown's bigoted woman quip*

What I found an interesting insight into Gordon Brown wasn't the "bigot"
comment (which was perhaps understandable), but that the first question
he asked was "who was responsible?"; for him, it seemed that the
important thing was to blame someone...

...I'll confess to have been hopeful at the beginning of his term that
there would be more content and less presentation, but Damien McBride
ruined any remaining optimism (the constant backstabbing of Blair for
most of the previous decade hadn't left much, but maybe could have been
written down slightly to overenthusiastic supporters).

IMHO his best bet for an election win was to call it early on, when he
looked quite calm and statesmanlike in the face of floods and
terrorists.

[![gravelbelly22](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1242)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
gravelbelly22 replied to [this comment from
asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155500)
| [February 12, 2013
14:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157338)

**304:**

*A government minister is one person with a staff of about five. They
stand on one side of the field. On the opposing team is the thousand
bureaucrats that make up the ministry. The minister's objective is to
change something. The bureaucracy's objective is to keep doing what they
have always done. Given the rate of reshuffles, a minister is typically
in post for about two years. It'll take them the first six months to
really figure out what's going on because their predecessor was a
political opponent who didn't brief them. That gives them about 18
months to accomplish something and they're going to be fought every step
of the way.*

So - would it be fair to say that Politicians will favour "revolution
over evolution" (because "something must be seen to be done"), while
Ministries will favour "evolution over revolution" (often because
they've seen several previous variations on the same "Politician's
Really Good Idea", that have either failed or missed the point).

Neither is the perfect answer; in engineering or politics.

[![gravelbelly22](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1242)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
gravelbelly22 replied to [this comment from Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1155736)
| [February 12, 2013
14:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157347)

**305:**

*What makes you think they've been neutered?*

Well, the claims of "if we don't get to lock people up without trial for
90-plus days, we'll never beat the terrorists" and "everyone should have
to carry an ID card, or we'll never beat the terrorists" from the last
government got delayed and defeated in the face of a large majority in
the Commons, so you're right.

As for "shadowy Royal veto", it looks as if you had a Monarch who was
trying to keep an important constitutional principle intact, and to stop
a Prime Minister who wanted no reins on his power to take the country
into a war; looked like a good call to me.

To me it looks bad in principle, but far more attractive in actual
practice.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
gravelbelly22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157338)
| [February 12, 2013
14:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157353)

**306:**

*So - would it be fair to say that Politicians will favour "revolution
over evolution" (because "something must be seen to be done"), while
Ministries will favour "evolution over revolution" (often because
they've seen several previous variations on the same "Politician's
Really Good Idea", that have either failed or missed the point).*

From "Yes Minister" "The trouble with Ministers is that something
happens and they react by saying 'Something **must be done**. This is
something, therefore we must do it."

[![ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)
replied to [this comment from
heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156720)
| [February 12, 2013
15:40](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157372)

**307:**

**Then again, you said you wanted a revolution, so I guess that's why
this seems like a good idea to you.**

You must have confused me with someone else. I never said I wanted a
revolution.

And if you re-read my posts, I specifically said I **do not** think
representation by lot is a good idea. I was just pointing out HOW it
would be set up if it WERE implemented.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 12, 2013
17:24](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157404)

**308:**

gravelbelly22 @ 305\
 Really?\
 [See you this
horror](http://mikesivier.wordpress.com/2013/02/11/uk-police-state-moves-a-step-closer-to-your-door/)
and raise you a Cuban bay?

[![scentofviolets](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-46-100x100.png)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/livejournal_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=46)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/livejournal_logo.png)](http://scentofviolets.livejournal.com/)
[scentofviolets](http://scentofviolets.livejournal.com/ "http://scentofviolets.livejournal.com/")
| [February 12, 2013
17:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157409)

**309:**

This thread doesn't really seem to be going anywhere, so here's a little
something to think about:

> A simple addition to the rules reversed this collapse of co-operation,
> and that was the introduction of altruistic punishment. Fehr and
> Gachter allowed players to fine other players credits, at a cost to
> themselves. This is true altruistic punishment because the groups
> change after each round, and the players are anonymous. There may have
> been no direct benefit to fining other players, but players fined
> often and they fined hard – and, as you'd expect, they chose to fine
> other players who hadn't chipped in on that round. The effect on
> cooperation was electric. With altruistic punishment, the average
> amount each player contributed rose and rose, instead of declining.
> The fine system allowed cooperation between groups of strangers who
> wouldn't meet again, overcoming the challenge of the free rider
> problem.

History does rhyme. But it doesn't have to repeat. Maybe game theory,
the heterodox school of economics and the like really can make the world
a better place without the mass re-engineering of the human race into
New Soviet Man.

[![heteromeles](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1082)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/)
[heteromeles](http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/ "http://heteromeles.wordpress.com/")
replied to [this comment from
ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157372)
| [February 12, 2013
19:40](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157430)

**310:**

My mistake. Still, I think simple human nature would preclude using the
lottery model, and I don't think tinkering with it will ever make it
viable, since most people lack the basic requisite skills and tolerance
of other people to make it work.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from
gravelbelly22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157338)
| [February 12, 2013
20:46](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157447)

**311:**

> So - would it be fair to say that Politicians will favour "revolution
> over evolution" [...], while Ministries will favour "evolution over
> revolution"

Those are a fair description of their respective positions. What we
usually end up getting in practice is sabotaged revolutions that end up
being a rearrangement of the rubble of the same old system, and the
gradual accrual of power to bureaucrats.

[![asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=53)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/openid_logo.png)](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/)
[asuffield.myopenid.com](http://asuffield.myopenid.com/ "http://asuffield.myopenid.com/")
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1156735)
| [February 12, 2013
20:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157448)

**312:**

> That's because the Lemmingcrats are screwed

I shall reply to this trolling only to correct the gratuitous lie: this
has been going on for over a decade, long before the present government,
and hence has clearly got absolutely nothing to do with it.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 12, 2013
22:37](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157462)

**313:**

@ 312\
 NOT trolling\
 I used to be a party member of the Lemmingcrats!\
 Gave up when I found they were just as big lying incompetent shits as
all the others. They were supposed to be strong on education - but one
of the local Lem councillors is functionally illiterate - um.\
 Here (this constituency) they have been entryfied by followers of the
"religion of peace" ...\
 Clegg has NO idea at all re tax: my wife is an expert & her language on
the subject is not fit for a family publication!\
 They are anti-nuclear power.\
 Huhne is going to go down (most likely)\
 And they are NOT screwed?\
 Please elucidate.

[![Richyrland](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1754)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Richyrland](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1754)
| [February 12, 2013
23:00](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157469)

**314:**

The biggest problem I have with revolution is that guys like me almost
always end up getting shot.

Original point: \
 Government is like air. If it's being done right, you shouldn't notice
it much at all. People don't get pissed off because the potholes are
filled, criminals are arrested and given fair trials, and bandits don't
invade and burn your house down.

If most people aren't unhappy(mostly), and stuff gets done (mostly), and
it's efficient (mostly)..what's the issue?

Also: If we're bringing back Monarchy I totally call dibs. I get to be
king, and everyone will build giant golden statues of me. Then you can
complain about how bad democracy is in comparison.

But I get to be king. Cause I called dibs.

[![zhochaka](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=953)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
zhochaka replied to [this comment from
El](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157229)
| [February 13, 2013
07:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157715)

**315:**

The UK print media are where you get the political bias in reporting.
And since we have more national newspapers than TV news channels, and
they are "self regulating", that's where you will find the equialents of
Fox News.

Under the current system, it's quite legal to publish a newspaper
without having to pay any attention to the Press Complaints Commission,
and if you want to see a single-issue campaign, the *Daily Express* is
so frothingly anti-Europe it can't tell the difference between the EU
and the ECHR.

There's a reason I sometimes watch *Al Jazeera* for news.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 13, 2013
08:38](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157744)

**316:**

@ 315\
 The Express is an embarassment (it always was, actually) to those of us
who are or have become "anti-Europe"\
 As someone who wholeheardedly voted "IN" back in 1975, I am now wanting
OUT.\
 The current EU is not what I voted for.\
 It has become a bureaucratic super-state, interfering in amazingly
petty ways, where it has no business, usually at the behest of vested
interests, such as the agrobusiness lobby. [to take but one example]\
 We pay, nett, approx £9.5 billion a year to the EU, for, what,
precisely? Norway & Switzerland seem to be doing quite nicely.\
 Which reminds me, we should also be IN "Shengen", whilst OUT of the EU
......\
 Then since we are talking about the Beige dictatorship, there's the EU
arrest warrant, where you do NOT have to show a *Prima Faciae* case,
before you can sling somonene in a foreign slammer for years, with no
trial or test, especially when you've got the wrong person - happened
more than once.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
asuffield.myopenid.com](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157448)
| [February 13, 2013
09:03](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157757)

**317:**

Observation ref 312 and 313.

Around 20 years ago, I would have considered voting LibDem.

The Scots Parliament happened, and in the first 2 terms they formed a
coalition with Labour (giving said coalition an overall majority); fair
enough, that's what was supposed to happen in principle regardless of
party names. In the 3rd term, the Scottish electorate swung from Labour
to SNP, and the LibDems refused to form a coalition, resulting in a
minority government.

Now back to Westminster, where they've formed a ConDem coalition.

This leads me to the conclusion that they're actually just a
power-hungry shower, who's only political principle or policy is support
for the Treaty of Union between Scotland and England, and the 2 relevant
ratifying acts.

[![https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnkVz4wsvJnvbaRr1HSgyqpnU1xt285m6c](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2014)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnkVz4wsvJnvbaRr1HSgyqpnU1xt285m6c
replied to [this comment from
bencurthoys](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154932)
| [February 13, 2013
11:01](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157835)

**318:**

Great plan, but you'll have to stay undercover for the whole time it
takes you to get richt. Like a spy in the Cold War, you can never loose
sight of your dual goal or the beigeness will get to you, the endless
powerpoint presentations, the quasi scientific economic shibboleths.\
 Good luck with coming through all that unscathed.

[![https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnkVz4wsvJnvbaRr1HSgyqpnU1xt285m6c](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2014)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnkVz4wsvJnvbaRr1HSgyqpnU1xt285m6c
replied to [this comment from
till](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154977)
| [February 13, 2013
13:47](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157908)

**319:**

What a great piece! I love beige as a description of the phenomenon!\
 Could the problem be compounded because everyone is using the same
tools (software and such), being taught the same 'leadership' seminars
and the same managerial techniques, and using the same marketing ploys?\
 In Germany the political system is less blatantly oligarchic than in
Britain, yet the outcome is the same and beigeness reigns supreme.\
 I am, however, old enough to remember politicians who thought nothing
of making uncomfortable decisions. Perhaps because the party lists were
not automatically vetted for media compatibility?\
 And the beigeness has seeped into the minds of the very young. In
consequence they are anxiety ridden, because the power of beige quells
any hope or enthusiasm they might have started out with.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
https://www.google.com/accounts/o8/id?id=AItOawnkVz4wsvJnvbaRr1HSgyqpnU1xt285m6c](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157908)
| [February 13, 2013
13:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157910)

**320:**

Add to that how as recently as about 20-odd years ago most MPs were
"second careerists" who'd been (still were) a businessman, a teacher, a
lawyer, a trades unionist, a journalist... but now they're almost all
law or politics graduates who made politics their career.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157910)
| [February 13, 2013
14:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157915)

**321:**

The US lost that a century or more ago due to the size of the country as
best I can tell.

If most of the population lives within a hour or so of the legislative
body meeting house it is much easier to have a "real" career.

Or am I misunderstanding the geography of the UK?

Plus your system where the PM has almost dictatorial powers compared to
a US president makes things a bit different. No majority other party
controlling the legislature.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157744)
| [February 13, 2013
14:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157919)

**322:**

*As someone who wholeheardedly voted "IN" back in 1975, I am now wanting
OUT.\
 The current EU is not what I voted for.\
 It has become a bureaucratic super-state, interfering in amazingly
petty ways, where it has no business, usually at the behest of vested
interests, such as the agrobusiness lobby. [to take but one example]*

Which is where the Tea Party in the US got it's start. There was a
growing crowd of "ordinary" people who were R's but who were growing
more and more pissed at the R's in Washington during the Bush years.
They just disliked the D's more. No Child Left Behind (not for it's
goals but for its incredibly heavy handed and at times impossible
implementation details plus no funding), unpaid expansion of
prescription drug programs for elderly, starting wars with no plans for
pay for them OR FINISH them, etc... The 06 elections were a sign of this
discontent. And the 08 elections gave the big hard right money to jump
in, give it a name, then take over the message.

And to decicco.barry, you're right there were no big protests but there
were a lot of unhappy R's behind the scenes. Once O won in 08 there was
very little felt need for "unity".

Of course then the money behind the TP public media campaigns started
getting primary candidates who could never win and ......

\

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157915)
| [February 13, 2013
14:32](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157926)

**323:**

I think you're underestimating how slow travel was prior to the age of
"cheap jet travel"; in the 1950s my grandfather lived near his main work
base at Ardeer, Ayrshire, Scotland. He had to attend meetings at the
company head office in London, England. If it had not been for
over-night sleeper train services, he would have been away from his base
(and his family) for 3 days and 2 nights for every one of those
meetings.

AIUI, even in the 1990s, OGH was only able to live in Edinburgh and work
in London by using the Sunday night sleeper South, and the Friday night
one North.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157926)
| [February 13, 2013
15:02](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157933)

**324:**

My knowledge of the UK is somewhat sketching having never been on that
side of the pond but I think previous commenters have stated that
something like 50% of the population of England lives near London.

And compared to the US in the 40s it was still easy to get from "end to
end".

Even today traveling coast to coast in the US is hard even on jets.
Unless you have a body that's not normal as to sleep patterns and such
you really need 2 or 3 days to hold a meeting on one coast and live on
the other. I did this for a few years and even staying east of the
Mississippi it was hard to have a life. (I was single at the time.)

My point was it was EASIER to have a life outside of politics in the UK
than the US. Not that it was easy in either place.

Or did I miss something.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157933)
| [February 13, 2013
15:20](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157937)

**325:**

Ah; I thought you were saying that it was easy to have a life outside
politics in the UK.

I actually picked a relatively poor example as it was. Ok, I'm now
quoting outliers, but before air travel it would take more like 6 days
to make the return trip from the Western or Northern Isles of Scotland
to London, which is enough to make "a life there" and working in London
impossible. "Easier" is a relative term, before allowing that our
parliament sits until "silly o'clock" more frequently than Congress does
AIUI.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157937)
| [February 13, 2013
15:45](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157943)

**326:**

*Ok, I'm now quoting outliers, but before air travel it would take more
like 6 days to make the return trip from the Western or Northern Isles
of Scotland to London,*

I have a friend in her 50s. She grew up in Montana. After she gets off
the last plane it is still a 5 hour drive to get "home". On paved roads.
Cell service is so thin you call ahead and let them know you're on the
way so if you don't get there in 6 hours or so they can start looking.
:)

That part of the US will likely never be close to anything.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157943)
| [February 13, 2013
15:56](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157947)

**327:**

Er, we've established that there are parts of both nations that are far
enough from the capital to make a day trip there impossible. I didn't
intend to make it a game of "top trumps".

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 13, 2013
16:14](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157950)

**328:**

@ 319\
 No the 60-70's rebellion in "kids" isn't there, because of the fear of
not ever getting a job, what with computer-gathered date tracking
everything ...\
 David L @ 322\
 One also has to remember that, back in 1975, it was the Labour party
that was horribly split on Europe, not so the tories, who saw it as a
Big-Business opportunity. Whereas (parts of) Labour was concerend,
rightly as it turned out, as to the power of the CAP to distort things.\
 What affects a lot of ordinary people is the bureaucracy - it really is
beginning to filter down, so that there are quite a few Labour VOTERS,
who are turning anti-EU. Doesn't seem to have penetrated to most of the
leadership - yet.

paws @ 323\
 ICI Nobel explosives division, I assume? Where my father was drafted to
make things that went bang in 1941 (as a post-graduate-qualified
chemist)\
 You said "Ardeer" - not Saltcoats or Kilwinning or Ardrossan.

@ 326/7\
 "Far enough" does not have to be in physical distance, either.\
 There are some places condisderably nearer London, that are almost as
awkward to get to as the Western Isles, or "Fair Isle".\
 The UK does have one advantage - it is all in one time zone.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157950)
| [February 13, 2013
16:36](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157958)

**329:**

Nobel Explosives indeed, and my Grandfather spent 1941..45 in the
Dumfriesshire and Galloway plants.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157950)
| [February 13, 2013
17:12](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157970)

**330:**

I disagree - the reasons there aren't such obvious revolts by the young
are far more complex than you suggest. For starters, they're outnumbered
by old people, unlike the good old days.\
 Secondly there is a lack of political agitation and alternative
political philosophies. In this sense beige has outlasted them all.\
 Thirdly there are lots of nice distractions such as computer games, tv
and the internet which help keep you from getting organised and noticing
what is being done until it is too late. \
 There will be a chilling effect of fear of databases, but that will be
a contributory cause, rather than the main one.

Which is not to say that there aren't youngsters noticing things; the
problem is that there are ever fewer ways for them to get involved and
active.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157947)
| [February 13, 2013
17:25](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157973)

**331:**

Yep. I wonder still why it too so long for politics in the UK to become
a profession. :)

[![jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1618)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jessicayogini replied to [this comment from
guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157970)
| [February 13, 2013
18:26](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157983)

**332:**

Two huge reasons for the different in youth now from the 60s is the
greatly intensified competition for jobs and, in the US, student loan
debt. When youth were dropping out, they knew they could easily drop
back in whenever they wanted. A college degree of any kind was an
automatic ticket to a decent job. That ended in the US in the early
70s.\

[![ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1357)
replied to [this comment from
guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157970)
| [February 13, 2013
18:30](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157985)

**333:**

Agree with you except for the last sentence. It's not that there are
"ever fewer ways for young people to get involved and active" -- with
Internet there are more such ways than ever before. But exactly because
there are so many different ways "to get involved" (most of them
single-issue), no single one gets much participation. If draft were
reinstated, that would change in a hurry -- which is why it will never
be reinstated.

[![El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://eloisepasteur.net/blog/)
[El](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1002)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157973)
| [February 13, 2013
20:10](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158002)

**334:**

I suspect there's a mix of reasons.

Tories tend to come from monied backgrounds - the current crop perhaps a
bit less so, but go back 20 years and it was a pretty sound
generalisation. They were often expected to follow the family profession
and would then "inherit" the family seat when Daddy-dearest shuffled off
this mortal coil. So no profession there.

The LibDems, back in the Whig days were similar. Most of the time after
Labour arrived they were largely the fairly distant third party and did
odd things but in small numbers.

And Labour, to start, were the union's men. They were often picked from
union official ranks - John Prescott was possibly the last of them,
former steward on a liner and union shop steward too. Back in the 80's
when I was living in Liverpool, about half the Labour MPs from Liverpool
were former dockers, the older generation ship-builders. In other parts
of the country, they'd be miners, steel-workers and the like. Interested
in politics, definitely, but they worked first, then moved into it
later. If they didn't, there wasn't the support base for them.

With Labour, the crop that grew up New Labour were the first were a huge
majority went to university - supported higher education certainly
helped there. I'm not sure why the Tories went that way - I suspect New
Labour helped. They were in power for long enough for the older tories
with more diverse backgrounds to retire or die and the Labour model, and
the LibDem model too, which was moving that way, was seeming to work.

That would be my guess anyway.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from
ilya187](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157985)
| [February 13, 2013
20:55](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158011)

**335:**

I thought someone would mention the internet, but I was feeling ill at
the time and couldn't think of anything.\
 I sort of agree with what you said - except that I would like to
distingush between ways of being involved with the actual main line
political organisation, e.g. the labour party used to be about far more
than just running MP's; there were labour clubs, organisations and
suchlike, all involving younger people to a greater or lesser extent in
something which was ultimately related to the actual political
structures which ran the country.

For the conservatives, see Oxbridge, fox hunting and more recently,
merchant banks in the city.

Nowadays, yes, they can click on a myriad of little pressure groups, but
I think the direct connection is gone, and as you rightly point out,
pressure groups spread the load and don't really join the dots. \
 Which of course brings us back to beige.

[![guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[guthrie](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1022)
replied to [this comment from
jessicayogini](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1157983)
| [February 13, 2013
20:58](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158012)

**336:**

Yes, that's true as well. Here (UK) I think it took until the 80's
before things got bad. I've met quite a few people who were involved in
nationalised industries as apprentices and the like, mere teenagers,
when the 80's hit. They were able to move upwards afterwards because of
the training and skills they had recieved in the industries, which
opportunities are lacking for today's teenagers.

Personally, I can see that my dad still hasn't quite worked out how
different things are from the 60's, when people sometimes started
brilliant careers after meeting some bloke down the pub who needed a bit
of help for the next month in his business.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 13, 2013
22:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158030)

**337:**

paws @ 329\
 In which case, even with the huge work-force at the time, given their
levels (Your grandad had to go to Head Office) it is very likely that he
knew my father!\
 [ Who had the sense to scrounge an OFFICAL motor-bike with unlimited
petrol/mileage allowance in 1941-2, so that he could inspect the various
ammo dumps around the Scots' lowlands ]

guthrie @ 336 (& previous)\
 The rise of "managerialsim" in the 80s together with the Madwoman from
Grantham (note) & the slow creeping jelly of HR-departments - jobs were
swallowed by the beige dictatorship BEFORE politics was .....\
 note: I thought of myself as a leftwing tory - until she came along -
euw. I have also been a union Shop Steward - frightened the management
witless - because I WAS NOT a "socialist leftie" they could safely
pigeonhole ....\
 Got crapped on by both sides, needless to say - independance of thought
& action NOT wanted on voyage.\

[![onwardsandforwards](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2017)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/wordpress_logo.png)](http://onwardsandforwards.wordpress.com/)
[onwardsandforwards](http://onwardsandforwards.wordpress.com/ "http://onwardsandforwards.wordpress.com/")
| [February 14, 2013
03:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158104)

**338:**

I'll offer a parable in lieu of a well-formed alternative to beige
representative democracy:

The first pollykaryote arose quite by chance. Someone had started a
co-operative insurance group with es neighbors so they could protect one
another from foreclosures. Needing a constitution of sorts, they had
found a set of governance rules online which looked to do the trick. But
as it turned out, there lay a clause somewhere in that code stipulating
that any section could be changed, added or removed on a vote.
Naturally, members began to suggest new uses for their polity, slowly
shifting, nudging, extending its initial function. As it matured and
friends or neighbors asked to join, the leaderless society swelled
beyond its earlier, more manageable size, and so, after much
deliberation and a vote, it split in two.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158030)
| [February 14, 2013
08:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158285)

**339:**

Greg, I think you may be right. My grandfather was a line commissioning
engineer in that period, primarily at Powfoot (sp) in Dumfriesshire, but
sometimes in Girvan.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 14, 2013
09:18](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158294)

**340:**

I note that in the Vinge paper, he specifically points to 2020-2023 as
the most liekly time for "S".\
 A date which others (previous discussions here) also seem to be
converging on.

Question: WE are all aware of this, but out there, amongst the
muggles/drones/arts-trained/politicans/mundanes there isn't even the
faintest flicker of recognition that the world is about to alter,
profoundly & permanently.\
 Why is this so? And what will they (try to) do when the penny finally
drops? Or will it be too late, since once the rails had been laid across
Chat Moss, it was far too late to stem the power of steam?\
 One thing IS certain - the moment it does percolate through to
religious leaders power-crazed mentalities, we are in for really deep
shit, since they will strain every muscle to stop it.\
 Look forward to religious fundies bombing physics & computer
departments!

Can the "S" be avoided?\
 If our machine-intelligences are all serial in operating nature, then
yes, probably. But I think that isn't going to happen.

Vinge's paper is now 20 years old, with 10 left to run.\
 So far he seems to be not too far off-beam, especially where he speaks
ofthe then Usenet, compared to the present state of interconnectedness.
Um.

[![Greg.
Tingey](/mt/mt-static/support/assets_c/userpics/userpic-550-100x100.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=550)
| [February 14, 2013
09:22](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158297)

**341:**

Oops...\
 I think I may have posted to the worng/wrong thread!\
 Aplogies/apologies

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from Greg.
Tingey](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158294)
| [February 14, 2013
14:52](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158427)

**342:**

*Question: WE are all aware of this, but out there, amongst the
muggles/drones/arts-trained/politicans/mundanes there isn't even the
faintest flicker of recognition that the world is about to alter,
profoundly & permanently.*

Some of Matt Taibbi's writing covering elections suggests a tension in
many journalists and other public figures. They can see how broken the
system is, yet they're deeply afraid of what happens when too many
people see how broken the system is. It's OK to laugh about the system
and its problems among them, but only if you signal that you're totally
committed to the system and can't imagine anything else.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158427)
| [February 14, 2013
15:08](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158433)

**343:**

Well, the technology exists to move towards "direct democracy" on the
Swiss model. Both 10 Downing St and 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue have taken
baby steps in this direction with on-line petitioning systems.

[![gab.save](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2019)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
gab.save replied to [this comment from Poul-Henning
Kamp](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1154940)
| [February 14, 2013
17:33](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158476)

**344:**

You are suggesting a method similar to Sortition, which was quite
successful in ancient Athens. I agree, it's the best representation of
people.

[![Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Jay](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1193)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158433)
| [February 14, 2013
18:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158504)

**345:**

What I've seen of ballot initiatives in Florida and their reputation
from California make me deeply skeptical of direct democracy. A
reasonable understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of each
choice is a necessary (but not sufficient) condition for good
policymaking. Achieving that understanding requires a lot of time and
effort that individual citizens usually can better spend elsewhere.

[![JayGee](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1841)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[JayGee](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1841)
| [February 15, 2013
10:43](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159171)

**346:**

The question of how we judge the performance of our elected politicians
and officials (is there a difference) seems to keep coming up.

Here's something I heard on the radio a while back which has been kind
of ticklingnthe back of my brain while reading the discussion here...

[http://www.badscience.net/2013/01/i-made-this-radio-4-documentary-on-randomised-trials-on-government-policy/](http://www.badscience.net/2013/01/i-made-this-radio-4-documentary-on-randomised-trials-on-government-policy/)

...and there's an associated paper here...

[http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/test-learn-adapt-developing-public-policy-randomised-controlled-trials](http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/test-learn-adapt-developing-public-policy-randomised-controlled-trials)

Evidence based politics anyone?

If we can objectively measure and compare how succesful politicians are
at implementing the policies they promote and how effective those
policies are in terms of their declared aims then make the results
available to the voters in an accesible form then I'd say that was a
step in the right direction...

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from
Jay](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1158504)
| [February 15, 2013
11:00](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159176)

**347:**

My understanding is that the Californian model requires that a ballot be
held on certain matters, eg increasing tax rates?\
 If so, then it's not the same as the Swiss model that I suggested,
which only requires that matters which gain a certain level of popular
support be put to a referendum.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159176)
| [February 15, 2013
15:05](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159277)

**348:**

I'm not from CA but as best I know a ballot measure is basically a way
to write a new law bypassing the legislature. Almost anything is
possible.

The hard part (but not terribly hard if you have a rich OR motivated
group is getting enough signatures from eligible voters.

[![Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.krazykimchi.com)
[Nestor](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1120)
| [February 15, 2013
15:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159282)

**349:**

So, I was thinking about the subject of neoteny that came up in the
other thread, and I had a brainwave.

So you want a revolution? How about we give the vote to children?

Invert the franchise. Grant the vote to youth, on a bell curve of
weighting so younger children begin voting on less important issues, or
with a reduced percentage, gradually increasing until one reaches his
full voting power at the age where mental faculties and idealism are at
the highest point, and then gradually reduce the weight of the vote
until corrupt, disenchanted, cynical adults are completely removed from
the vote.

Yes, yes, crazy I know but the more I think about it the more appealing
it becomes. Think of the knock on effects on education. People would try
to use demography to affect the vote, but they do that already, only now
children's indoctrination would be in the limelight, and closely
scrutinized.

And funding for education? Critical thinking skills? The infantilization
of young adults and teenagers, reversed. Politics demistified by the
necessity to explain issues in a format comprehensible to a 12 year old.

Children of course are genuinely idealistic and compassionate, mentally
flexible and open minded, naturally aligned with the underdog since they
too are powerless and under authority in their daily lives.

And finally, what long term policies could be instituted by a voting
constituency that genuinely believes it's going to live forever?

Crazy eh? But don't tell me there isn't something there.

[![paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1066)
replied to [this comment from David
L](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159277)
| [February 15, 2013
15:46](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159299)

**350:**

All you can do at the "sufficient signatures" bit is get a measure put
to a full plebicite; you still have to actually win that plebicite to
create a new law.

Creating a new law that way doesn't just let you do an end run round the
legislature, but also round the lobbyists!

[![Nikola](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2032)

[![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=register&blog_id=1&return_to=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.antipope.org%2Fcharlie%2Fblog-static%2F2013%2F02%2Fpolitical-failure-modes-and-th.html)
[Nikola](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2032)
| [February 17, 2013
10:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1160686)

**351:**

Before activists spend to much time focusing on revolution, I would
argue they should focus there efforts to to strengthen the foundations
of liberal democracy. If these efforts achive results, and those reults
are not significant enough, they should nonetheless make the greater
change easier to achive.

1)Mass Media\
 2) Strengthening the rule of law by legislating for greater executive
accountability.

The mass media needs diversification, sure the internet helps, but a
healthier mainstream media needs to be legislated for. ( obviously this
is against the interests of the present monopoly, which is why it would
take focused activist efforts to have any chance of ever coming before
parliament in a useful form.)

Also, somehow, the judiciary needs to be given a greater ability to
judge the actions of the executive. Again without force it is unlikely
that parliament will implement legislation that brings greater
accountability to its actions.

But I feel that so long as power is not held accountable at the top
corruption, is inevitable.

Maybe a 10 yearly commission into past actions of government over that
time, and the ability to enforce accountability for acts committed by
politicians, bureaucratic institutions, would help.

There needs to be accountability for such actions as the illegal war on
Iraq. Under the present system this will not happen, but it is possible
that under a stronger system, where the powers that be know they may
face the consequences of there crimes, that those crimes would not occur
in the first place.

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
paws4thot](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1159299)
| [February 17, 2013
16:41](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1160874)

**352:**

*Creating a new law that way doesn't just let you do an end run round
the legislature, but also round the lobbyists!*

Not really. Anytime a measure seems to have enough support to pass
EVERYONE with skin in the game starts spending money fast to either
support or oppose the measure.

[![jeffrey.eric.fisher](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)
![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1347)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/google_logo.png)
jeffrey.eric.fisher | [February 18, 2013
06:07](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1161348)

**353:**

California direct democracy has some unusual features which I think are
bad:

\1) Unusually few signatures are required (vs other similar systems in
the US), so getting the signatures is actually not very hard for a large
organized group or anyone with a few million dollars.

\2) The constitution can be modified by a single simple majority vote
(provided such modifications aren't considered "revisions" by the
courts, which is horribly vague). That's just too quick and easy. The
legislature can't undo such constitutional changes nearly so easily so
if they are broken.

\3) The legislature may never repeal or modify a measure without a
popular vote.

\4) Ballot measures can come in off-time elections where turnout is even
lower than normal.

\
 I think the system in Washington state works a lot better.

\1) It requires relatively more signatures, so there aren't so many
measures by random groups and people (one guy has made a career of
starting up tax revolt style initiatives).

\2) The constitution cannot be changed by initiative.

\3) The legislature can't mess with them without a 2/3 vote for 2 years
after which they are like any other law (so 50%+1 to repeal/modify/etc).
There are initiatives which have been repeatedly passed and which the
legislature flouts as soon as they expire. These initiatives are also
dumb policy, IMO, so the system is working.

\4) Same issue exists.

California popular-voted itself into a situation where the legislative
majority had very little power to govern the state and the popular vote
process is a very bad one for weighing and deciding between competing
priorities.

California may be starting to turn this around, however. The legislature
can now (as of a couple years ago I believe) approve a budget with a
majority vote (rather than 2/3), though it still can't raise taxes, and
some large fraction of the budget is off limits due to initiative
mandated spending. The courts have begun to take a more limited view of
what initiatives are legal and what constitutional changes can be
accomplished via popular vote.

\
 Oh, and to those who think initiatives get past lobbiests... hah.
California ballots almost always have a measure or two written by a
single corporation or person to benefit them very specifically. There
are also regularly initiatives spawned out of national political
organizations. The marketing campaigns for plausibly successful
initiatives usually spend quite a few millions. That money means
political professionals and lobbiests are involved.

[![pjm](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2040)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[pjm](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2040)
| [February 18, 2013
21:57](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1161909)

**354:**

(This topic get cross-listed on Crooked Timber and I wrote skads
there.)\
 @Charlie - I disagree with more than one unspoken (or not) premise. \
 1) I believe that representative democracy is quite a significant
invention in human history but they are not created equally\
 (at the extreme undemocratic and dysfunctional end is the US but the
UK, then perhaps France and Japan) all have anti-democratic and
dysfunctional features.\
 2) I think PR systems are superior for the purposes of democracy (and
for the representing the interests of the majority, especially working
people) but even PR systems can have structural weakness (one sign of
this might be too many party rather than too few). \
 3) I don't Michels is particularly insightful as to what happened to
the German SPD (and Michels ended up a quasi-fascist so his judgement
might be somewhat suspect). The big problem with Michels is the he
demonizes a process which students of social movements take as
inevitable, down surges in the levels movement mobilization, usually on
a generational time scale. \
 4)Perhaps most important, it is not the oligarchs within the party that
are determinative of democratic robustness (at least as a major factor),
it is inter-party competition. In the US, there actually are no parties
(in the European sense), no one is every thrown out of the DP or the GOP
because they don't adhere to the party platform. But competition is what
makes parties follow their own platforms because voters can punish
errant parties by a non-self-defeating protest vote for another party
(e.g. Socialist voters throwing their support to another left
alternative). (Note, this is not what happens in the UK's 2.5 party
system, the only alternative to Labor are a centrist minor parties,
Labor remains a fratricidal "Big Tent") If think Anthony Downs analysis
of ideology and party competition and its importance for democratic
empowerment is much more instructive than anything Michels wrote. \
 4)Last point for now, how imperfect proportional multi-party
democracies are (and I think they are more perfect you realize), their
political choices and debates are influenced negatively by what happens
in non-PR countries (which often are large and powerful). So not
disagreeing we may be at a global nadir, we shouldn't be throwing the
representative dem. baby out with the bathwater just yet.\
 -PJM

[![mizminh](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2045)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[mizminh](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=2045)
| [February 22, 2013
08:42](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1165470)

**355:**

In the spirit of Whitman's "I contain multitudes" I wish more than one
of those multitudinous selves to be represented in our democracy. Now
it's just one aspect of my geographical self that has a rep. I have no
one specifically there to speak for my age or gender or profession(s) or
my bio-region. My presence at a street address is the basis of my
relationship with my sole representative.

Representative democracy is all very singular.

[![RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1439)
replied to [this comment from
mizminh](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1165470)
| [February 22, 2013
21:37](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1166011)

**356:**

Yeah. The money part of the vote divides up along lines of natural
special interest groups, but the ballot vote is gerrymandered
geographically. That's why I like the idea of self gerrymandering.

I'll give an example in a hypothetical US State. The state of Coronado
has 5 members of congress assigned to it based on the Census. After the
census, the state government divides the state up into 5 geographical
districts, only having to ensure that the populations of the districts
(also according to addresses on the census) are equal. These districts
remain in effect until the next census, ten years later. If you move
into the state and register to vote, you give your address, and that is
the district in which your vote is counted, in which your polling place
is, and whose electoral races you have a voice in.

However, there is no reason a state would really HAVE TO force
individuals to register based on physical address. Why couldn't they
allow residents of the state to register in another district if they
were willing to travel there to vote? In large states, the special
interest groups would game this system, telling members where to vote,
not just who to vote for. So, if your main interest is Global Warming,
and you lived in a large state, there might be somebody running in one
of the races whose main interest is Global Warming. Your organization of
like minded people would make it known that that person was technically
running in district 9, say, and that all of his or her supporters should
register in District 9 to ensure the election of a representative for
their cause. Self gerrymandering.

An even better, but less probable, system would be to have a threshold
system, as I described up above. Basically it would be like getting
signatures on a petition. Get a hundred thousand registered supporters
and you get a seat in congress. An individual can only support one
candidate at a time, so if you want to vote for someone else, you have
to go down to the perpetually open "Voting Office" and change your
support from your old favorite to your new one. Thus politicians would
constantly be getting put in and out of office--no scheduled elections,
since they are constantly ongoing, and no terms of office at all. Any
group with enough people would be able to have a representative voice.

[![Gerald
Fnord](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1219)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[Gerald
Fnord](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1219)
| [February 24, 2013
18:46](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1167482)

**357:**

That there were discontent from harder-right conservatives within the
U.S.'s Republican Party is doubtless true, but if it had just stayed
discontent it would be essentially meaningless, since no matter what
even democratic governments (or you) do, there will be some noticeable
number of people who will be discontent therewith. It was the use of
these people by oligarchs for their ends ('Rich people hiding out in the
middle of a bunch of poor people,' according to the better translation
of a fictional Chinese lecturer c.2030 C.E.) that made the
difference...just about the same time as (for example) Jim Santelli had
a pre-scripted rant against helping private individuals in trouble with
their mortgages and there was a sudden need for men to shout debate
about the proposed insurance reforms down.

This isn't as insidious as it sounds, since their professed ideology
identifies the interests of all property-holders, whether someone who
owns but a rude hut, waistcoat, and matchlock or William Gates III. That
is to say, they are \_proud\_ to be tools of the wealthy, as the wealthy
have proved their worth as leaders by being so. In the society they
want, in which almost all decisions will be made by the Market, the
wealthy would have even \_more\_ power, so doing as the wealthy will
hastens the Kingdom both as a goal and also by its very practice.

(There are Tea Partiers who believe that the U.S. has veered so far from
the True Knowledge that you can't even trust rich persons who \_aren't\_
named 'Soros', [and in a better world would come out the other side into
Left Anarchism]...guess who doesn't get a lot of money thrown at them.)

[![David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/default-userpic-90.jpg)](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)

![image](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-static/images/comment/mt_logo.png)
[David
L](http://www.antipope.org/mt/mt-cp.cgi?__mode=view&blog_id=1&id=1028)
replied to [this comment from
RDSouth](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1166011)
| [February 26, 2013
04:29](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html#comment-1169055)

**358:**

*Why couldn't they allow residents of the state to register in another
district if they were willing to travel there to vote?*

Of course living in the US you do realize that you really vote in
multiple districts. Local (sometimes several), state, federal. Your
system would get to be a bit crazy unless totally virtual/online.

### Buy my Books

-   [US English
    editions](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-us.html)
-   [UK English
    editions](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-uk.html)
-   [Deutsche
    Ausgaben](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-de.html)
-   [日本語の本](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/buy-my-books/buy-my-books-jp.html)

### Quick Stuff

-   [**FAQ:** Who am
    I?](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/fiction/faq.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Moderation
    Policy](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2008/06/moderation-policy.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Why is there no
    tipjar?](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2009/03/reminder-why-theres-no-tipjar.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Copyright
    Notice](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/faq-copyright-and-fair-usagefa.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Inviting Charles Stross to
    speak](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2009/07/faq-inviting-charles-stross-to.html)
-   [**FAQ:** Fan
    Fiction](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2010/05/faq-fanfic.html)
-   [Bibliography and online
    fiction](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/fiction/online-fiction-by-charles-stro.html)
-   [Talk to me](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/who_am_i/foo.cgi)
-   [Non-blog writing (old)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/old/)

### Specials

-   **[Common Misconceptions About
    Publishing](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2010/04/common-misconceptions-about-pu-1.html)**—a
    series of essays about the industry I work in.
-   **[How I Got Here In The
    End](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2009/07/how-i-got-here-in-the-end-my-n.html)**—my
    non-writing autobiography, or what I did *before* becoming a
    full-time writer.
-   **[Unwirer](http://craphound.com/unwirer/)**—an experiment in weblog
    mediated collaborative fiction.
-   **[Shaping the
    Future](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2007/05/shaping-the-future.html)**—a
    talk I gave on the social implications of Moore's Law.
-   **[Japan: first
    impressions](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static//2007/11/japan-some-impressions.html)**
    — or, what I did on my holidays
-   **[Inside the MIT Media
    Lab](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/rants/inside-the-mit-media-lab.html)**—what
    it’s like to spend a day wandering around the Media Lab.
-   **[The High Frontier,
    Redux](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2007/06/the-high-frontier-redux.html)**
    — space colonization: feasible or futile?
-   **[“Nothing like this will be built
    again”](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/rants/nothing-like-this-will-be-buil.html)**—inside
    a nuclear reactor complex.
-   **[Old
    blog](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/old/blog-old/)**—2003-2006
    (RIP)

### Merchandise

### About this Entry

This page contains a single entry by [Charlie
Stross](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/) published on *February 8, 2013
10:20 AM*.

[This explains
everything](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/this-explains-everything.html)
was the previous entry in this blog.

[Boskone
50](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/boskone-50.html)
is the next entry in this blog.

Find recent content on the [main
index](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/) or look in the
[archives](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/archives.html) to
find all content.

### Search this blog

### Propaganda

[![image](http://widgets.openrightsgroup.org/founding1000/since/223224.png)](http://www.openrightsgroup.org/)

### Categories

-   [Administrative
    (5)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/administrative/)
-   [Computers
    (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/computers/)
-   [Gadget Patrol
    (3)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/gadget-patrol/)
-   [Humour (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/humour/)
-   [News (4)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/news/)
-   [Politics
    (10)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/politics/)
-   [Publicity stuff
    (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/publicity-stuff/)
-   [Publishing
    (8)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/publishing/)
-   [Travel (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/travel/)
-   [Writing (15)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/writing/)

### Monthly [Archives](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/archives.html)

-   [June 2014
    (4)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/06/)
-   [May 2014 (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/05/)
-   [April 2014
    (9)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/04/)
-   [March 2014
    (10)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/03/)
-   [February 2014
    (19)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/02/)
-   [January 2014
    (14)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2014/01/)
-   [December 2013
    (7)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/12/)
-   [November 2013
    (10)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/11/)
-   [October 2013
    (11)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/10/)
-   [September 2013
    (11)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/09/)
-   [August 2013
    (8)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/08/)
-   [July 2013
    (12)](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/07/)

[Earlier, and other types of
archive.](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/archives.html)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/02/political-failure-modes-and-th.html
