[![image](http://atlanticmedia.122.2o7.net/b/ss/atlanticprod/1/H.22--NS/0)](http://www.omniture.com "Web Analytics")

[The Atlantic](/ "The Atlantic Home")
=====================================

[Features:](/features/) Segregation Now ...
===========================================

-   Menu

    ### All Atlantic

    -   [Home](/)
    -   [Politics](/politics/)
    -   [Business](/business/)
    -   [Tech](/tech/)
    -   [Entertainment](/entertainment/)
    -   [Health](/health/)
    -   [Education](/education/)
    -   [Sexes](/sexes/)
    -   [National](/national/)
    -   [Global](/international/)
    -   [Video](/video/)
    -   [Magazine](/magazine/)
    -   [In Focus](/infocus/)
    -   [Special Reports](/special-reports/)
    -   [Books](/books/)
    -   [Events](/live/)

    ### Follow Us

    -   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/TheAtlantic)
    -   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/TheAtlantic)
    -   [LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/today/theatlantic.com)
    -   [Google +](https://plus.google.com/109258622984321091629/posts)
    -   [RSS](/follow-the-atlantic/#rssFeeds)
    -   [App Store](http://wda.biz/mrmxub)
    -   [Play
        Store](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.theatlantic.weekly_android)

    ### Search

    Search

    ### [Subscribe](https://ssl.palmcoastd.com/23301/apps/ORDER_57881?ikey=I**A1J)

Segregation Now ...
===================

Sixty years after *Brown v. Board of Education*, the schools in
Tuscaloosa, Alabama, show how separate and unequal education is coming
back.

* * * * *

[Nikole Hannah-Jones](/nikole-hannah-jones/ "Nikole Hannah-Jones")

Photographs by Maisie Crow

April 16, 2014

Presented by

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dlogo&sz=88x31|120x60&c=857697270&tile=1)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dlogo&sz=88x31|120x60&c=857697270&tile=1)

-   [Facebook](#)
-   [Twitter](#)
-   [LinkedIn](#)
-   [Google+](#)
-   [Email](mailto:?subject=The%20Atlantic:%20Segregation%20Now%20...%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20&body=Sixty%20years%20after%C2%A0Brown%20v.%20Board%20of%20Education%2C%20the%20schools%20in%20Tuscaloosa%2C%20Alabama%2C%20show%20how%20separate%20and%20unequal%20education%20is%20coming%20back.%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%0A%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20Read%20this:%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/04/segregation-now/359813/)
-   [Comments](#disqus_thread)

Though James Dent could watch Central High School’s homecoming parade
from the porch of his faded-white bungalow, it had been years since he’d
bothered. But last fall, Dent’s oldest granddaughter, D’Leisha, was
vying for homecoming queen, and he knew she’d be poking up through the
sunroof of her mother’s car, hand cupped in a beauty-pageant wave,
looking for him.

So, at about 4:30 in the afternoon on October 18, Dent, age 64, made his
way off the porch and to the curb along Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard
in the West End of Tuscaloosa, Alabama. Soon he could hear the first
rumblings of the band.

There was a time, little more than a decade ago, when the Central High
School homecoming parade brought out the city. The parade started in the
former state capital’s lively downtown and seemed to go on for miles.
The horns of one of the state’s largest marching bands, some 150 members
strong, would bounce off the antebellum mansions along the streets.
Revelers—young and old, black and white, old money and no money—crowded
the sidewalks to watch the elaborate floats and cheer a football team
feared across the region.

### Reader Responses

**Excerpts from comments posted to this story:**

"The differences in my suburban elementary school and the first
city-wide 6th grade school were stark, mainly razor wire fencing, armed
police officers, drugs, weapons, cursing, disrespect for authorities,
etc."\
 —t**uscaloosated**

**"**Pretending that just mixing some white kids in there will solve all
these issues is stupid. It's a liberal, feel-good quick-fix that fixes
nothing."\
 —**PW**

"As an Asian-American who grew up in Los Angeles and went to college in
the SF Bay Area, I can safely say that this problem also exists in the
liberal bastion of California."\
 —**Lou**

"Whatever. My kinds go to an over 90% black school that was \#1 in the
city last year in math and \#3 in the state. And now other whites are
starting to send their kids too because they see how great of a school
it is."\
 —i**rene adler**

[Read all
comments](http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/04/segregation-now/359813/#disqus_thread)

Central was not just a renowned local high school. It was one of the
South’s signature integration success stories. In 1979, a federal judge
had ordered the merger of the city’s two largely segregated high schools
into one. The move was clumsy and unpopular, but its consequences were
profound. Within a few years, Central emerged as a powerhouse that
snatched up National Merit Scholarships and math-competition victories
just as readily as it won trophies in football, track, golf. James
Dent’s daughter Melissa graduated from Central in 1988, during its
heyday, and went on to become the first in her family to graduate from
college.

But on that sunlit day last October, as Dent searched for Melissa’s
daughter in the procession coming into view, he saw little to remind him
of that era. More caravan than parade, Central’s homecoming pageant
consisted of a wobbly group of about 30 band members, some marching
children from the nearby elementary schools, and a dozen or so cars with
handwritten signs attached to their sides. The route began in the
predominantly black West End and ended a few blocks later, just short of
the railroad tracks that divide that community from the rest of the
city.

The reason for the decline of Central’s homecoming parade is no secret.
In 2000, another federal judge released Tuscaloosa City Schools from the
court-ordered desegregation mandate that had governed it for a single
generation. Central had successfully achieved integration, the district
had argued—it could be trusted to manage that success going forward.

Freed from court oversight, Tuscaloosa’s schools have seemed to move
backwards in time. The citywide integrated high school is gone, replaced
by three smaller schools. Central retains the name of the old
powerhouse, but nothing more. A struggling school serving the city’s
poorest part of town, it is 99 percent black. D’Leisha, an honors
student since middle school, has only marginal college prospects.
Predominantly white neighborhoods adjacent to Central have been
gerrymandered into the attendance zones of other, whiter schools.

VIDEO: *Saving Central*, a short documentary film by Maisie Crow,
profiles the students and staff at Tuscaloosa’s Central High School.

Tuscaloosa’s schools today are not as starkly segregated as they were in
1954, the year the Supreme Court declared an end to separate and unequal
education in America. No all-white schools exist anymore—the city’s
white students generally attend schools with significant numbers of
black students. But while segregation as it is practiced today may be
different than it was 60 years ago, it is no less pernicious: in
Tuscaloosa and elsewhere, it involves the removal and isolation of poor
black and Latino students, in particular, from everyone else. In
Tuscaloosa today, nearly one in three black students attends a school
that looks as if *Brown v. Board of Education* never happened.

Tuscaloosa’s school resegregation—among the most extensive in the
country—is a story of city financial interests, secret meetings, and
angry public votes. It is a story shaped by racial politics and a
consuming fear of white flight. It was facilitated, to some extent, by
the city’s black elites. And it was blessed by a U.S. Department of
Justice no longer committed to fighting for the civil-rights aims it had
once championed.

related story

### Segregation and the Supreme Court

"Mr. Justice Warren and the eight brethren for whom he spoke found it in
what we all know: that excluding the Negro from schools where white
children go denotes inferiority of Negro, not white."

[Read the full
story](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1954/07/segregation-and-the-supreme-court/306055/)
by Arthur E. Sutherland in the July 1954 issue

Certainly what happened in Tuscaloosa was no accident. Nor was it
isolated. Schools in the South, once the most segregated in the country,
had by the 1970s become the most integrated, typically as a result of
federal court orders. But since 2000, judges have released hundreds of
school districts, from Mississippi to Virginia, from court-enforced
integration, and many of these districts have followed the same path as
Tuscaloosa’s—back toward segregation. Black children across the South
now attend majority-black schools at levels not seen in four decades.
Nationally, the achievement gap between black and white students, which
greatly narrowed during the era in which schools grew more integrated,
widened as they became less so.

In recent years, a new term, *apartheid schools*—meaning schools whose
white population is 1 percent or less, schools like Central—has entered
the scholarly lexicon. While most of these schools are in the Northeast
and Midwest, some 12 percent of black students in the South now attend
such schools—a figure likely to rise as court oversight continues to
wane. In 1972, due to strong federal enforcement, only about 25 percent
of black students in the South attended schools in which at least nine
out of 10 students were racial minorities. In districts released from
desegregation orders between 1990 and 2011, 53 percent of black students
now attend such schools, according to an analysis by ProPublica.

The Dent family, from grandfather to granddaughter, has lived out
integration’s fleeting wonder, a fact that hardened James Dent’s face as
he stood on that Tuscaloosa curb last October. The parade—just 15
minutes old, and yet almost over—quickly brought D’Leisha before him.
Nene, as her family calls her, beamed and waved. Dent waved back and
looked around to share the moment. But besides his wife and his stepson,
no one else was there.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_Dent001_V1/54a63d8ae.jpg)James
Dent began his education soon after the *Brown* decision, but never
attended school with a single white classmate.

### I. James

In the hours after the parade, James Dent sat back in a worn wingback
chair in the cramped but tidy house he and his wife rent in the West
End. As dusk brought out the whirring of cicadas, he quietly flipped
through a photo album devoted to D’Leisha’s many accomplishments. She’s
the class president, a member of the mayor’s youth council, a state
champion in track and field. Later that night, she would be named
homecoming queen as well.

Dent never went to college. One of 13 children born into the waning days
of Jim Crow, he took his place in the earliest of integrated American
institutions: the military. He served four years in the Air Force,
including a year in Vietnam, before returning to the West End to spend
the next 40 mixing cement for a living. The work was steady, but the pay
meager.

Thin, with chestnut skin, and seldom seen without a Vietnam-vet cap,
Dent is a reserved man, not prone to soapboxes. But after a long
silence, he gently suggested that maybe his granddaughter deserved a
little more than a 12-car salute at a brief and sparsely attended
parade. When D’Leisha graduates this spring, she will have spent her
entire public education in segregated schools. Just like he had.

“I think about it all the time, and ain’t nothing I can do about it,” he
said. “It ain’t going to get no better.” He said he just hoped she was
learning as much as the city’s white students were, then grew quiet
again. If integration was going to prove so brief, what, he wondered,
had all the fighting been for?

Tucked along the Black Warrior River some 60 miles southwest of
Birmingham, Tuscaloosa has a racial history marked by contradictions.
The city is home to three colleges, the University of Alabama among
them, and a pioneering psychiatric hospital. Its civic leaders have, at
times, been called progressive. A *New York Times*reporter covering
civil rights in the 1950s described Tuscaloosa as a “clean, prosperous
city that has long been proud of its good race relations.”

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_AP560_V1/519bbdabf.jpg)University
of Alabama students demonstrate in 1956 against the enrollment of a
black student. (Associated Press)

And yet, of course, the phrase *good race relations* was misleading: the
city operated under the dictates of Jim Crow until the passage of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964. Black people took their first breaths in
segregated hospital rooms, worshipped in segregated churches, and, when
they died, were buried in segregated graveyards. The imperial wizard of
the United Klans of America called Tuscaloosa home during the
civil-rights era. Historians and older black residents say the city
avoided the ugliest violence of that time because black people mostly
stayed in their place.

Unlike many other southern cities, Tuscaloosa has a long tradition of
educating black children. When the city founded its public-school system
in 1885, it opened both white and black schools. That year, the new
school board provided maps, tables, blackboards, and crayons for 274
white children and 173 black children.

But that does not mean that Tuscaloosa’s schools were equal before their
integration, or that the city would accommodate integration willingly
(as the infamous riots foiling the attempted integration of the
University of Alabama in 1956 attested).

related story

### How Kids Dealt With the Stress of Desegregation

"I soon realized how little difference skin color makes in the way most
children play and study with one another, how ironically well these
battered schools held together on the inside while storms swirled
without."

[Read the full
story](http://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2014/01/how-kids-dealt-with-the-stress-of-desegregation/283146/)
from the March 1963 issue

James Dent entered first grade at the “colored” Central Elementary not
long after the Supreme Court issued its landmark *Brown v. Board of
Education* decision in 1954. “We conclude that, in the field of public
education, the doctrine of ‘separate but equal’ has no place,” Chief
Justice Earl Warren wrote. “Separate educational facilities are
inherently unequal.” And yet—so ferocious and effective was the southern
pushback against desegregation—Dent would never attend school with a
white classmate.

The *Brown* ruling did not hinge on the inferior resources allotted
black students under many segregated educational systems. As Warren
pointed out in his decision, many southern officials, in an effort to
forestall integration, had been investing heavily in bringing black
schools up to white standards, so that by the time the Court agreed to
hear *Brown*, school facilities and teacher salaries in many black
public schools had “been equalized, or [were] being equalized.”

“We must look instead,” Warren wrote, “to the effect of segregation
itself.” He wrote that to separate black children “from others of
similar age and qualifications solely because of their race generates a
feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may
affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone.” The
justices noted that education was “perhaps the most important function
of state and local governments” and that the integration of schools was
essential to the integration of black citizens into society as a whole.

The racial caste system the Court suddenly deemed illegal predated the
nation itself.

The ruling came with a heavy compromise. Warren understood the storm of
resistance likely to confront the decision. He believed only a united
Court could contain southern rage, but some of the justices wanted to go
slow. So, instead of laying out an explicit framework for desegregation,
the Court acknowledged that the “variety of local conditions” made
dismantling Jim Crow schools a complicated matter, and ultimately placed
the burden of enforcing its ruling on district courts. It gave the lower
courts no guidance other than to say that desegregation should proceed
“with all deliberate speed.”

In some ways, the Court’s hesitancy to mandate immediate desegregation
is understandable. The racial caste system the Court suddenly deemed
illegal not only predated the nation itself but had been sanctioned by
that very judicial body for six decades.

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures1&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=0)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures1&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=0)

Yet while the Court dragged its feet on what to do, southern officials
were moving quickly. Virginia Governor Thomas B. Stanley vowed to use
“every legal means” to “continue segregated schools.” Alabama joined
other southern states in passing laws allowing or requiring school
boards to shut schools to avoid having even a handful of black children
sit in classrooms with white ones. Some states helped fund the all-white
academies popping up across the South. State officials encouraged white
parents to remove their children from public schools, helping to set off
the white flight that continues to plague school systems today. Two
years after the *Brown* ruling, not a single black child attended school
with white children in eight of the 11 former Confederate states,
including Alabama.

Dent doesn’t recall hearing his parents ever discuss his new right to an
integrated education. His mother, a domestic who cleaned white people’s
houses, provided the family with its only stable income; his father
worked odd jobs as he could find them. Dent and his parents and 12
siblings were often on the move, sometimes crashing with relatives.

School did not come easily to Dent, an athletic boy with a serious face,
nor did he particularly like it. Mostly, it reminded him of how poor his
family was. “I remember going to school barefoot” as a young child, Dent
told me. “I’d be so embarrassed, I’d try to play hooky.”

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/processed_0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_DeLeishaFamPhoto_V1_silo/7f305adf6.jpg)Dent
on leave from service in the Vietnam War

By the time he started his freshman year in high school, in 1964, a full
decade after *Brown*, just 2.3 percent of the nearly 3 million
school-aged black children in the old Confederate South attended school
alongside white children. None of those children lived in Tuscaloosa. At
Dent’s school, Druid High, students learned from hand-me-down textbooks
and lagged behind their white counterparts on achievement tests. The
curriculum pushed students toward learning a trade instead of preparing
for college.

related story

### “Segregation Academies“ Are Still Going Strong

"It took LaToysha Brown 13 years to realize how little interaction she
had with white peers in her Mississippi Delta town: not at church, not
at school, not at anywhere."

[Read the full December 2012
story](http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2012/12/in-southern-towns-segregation-academies-are-still-going-strong/266207/)
by Sarah Carr

Even so, Dent’s experience at Druid reveals a truth often lost in the
history of school integration. Though its resources were not as rich as
those of the all-white Tuscaloosa High, Druid was a source of pride
within the city’s black community. Its students soaked up lessons from a
committed staff of all-black teachers, many of whom were exceptionally
talented, in part because teaching was among the only professional
careers open to black southerners at the time. What the school lacked in
racial diversity, it made up for in economic variety: the children of
domestic workers walked the halls with the children of college
professors. Condoleezza Rice was one of Dent’s schoolmates.

McDonald Hughes, Druid’s tall, stern principal, instilled a sense of
discipline and of possibility in his students. “He’d grab you by the
shoulders,” Dent recalled with a laugh. “He wanted you to succeed.”

Just before Dent’s freshman year, Congress had passed the Civil Rights
Act of 1964. The law barred school districts that discriminated against
black students from receiving federal education funding, which would
soon be increased by more than $1 billion. Under the law, the feds for
the first time could sue defiant districts. The sweeping legislation
brought about the rarest of moments in American history: all three
branches of government were aligned on civil rights. Backed by the
courts and Congress, the Johnson administration set the Justice
Department to aggressively pursuing desegregation.

James Dent would never feel the impact of these changes: Druid High
remained untouched until well after his graduation. Throughout the
South, school officials, realizing they could not avoid integration
altogether, sought “race neutral” means to control it. Some adopted
plans for “neighborhood schools,” with attendance zones carefully drawn
around racially distinct parts of town. As a result, token integration
replaced absolute segregation in many places. All-white schools started
disappearing, but all-black schools remained common.

Still, by 1968, one out of three southern black kids was going to school
with white children. That same year, the Supreme Court revealed its
growing impatience when it ordered school officials to produce plans
that promised “realistically to work, and realistically to work now,”
eliminating segregation “root and branch.” Three years later, the Court
emphasized that desegregation plans should be judged by their
effectiveness in eliminating racially identifiable schools.

The dominoes, at last, had begun to fall.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_Dent005_V1/fcef7fef3.jpg)Unlike
her father—and now her daughter—Melissa Dent attended an integrated high
school.

### II. Melissa

Melissa Dent, James’s first child, was born in 1969, around the time the
National Education Association and the Department of Justice persuaded a
federal court to force Tuscaloosa to comply with a statewide
desegregation order. As she began to toddle and then run around,
revealing herself to be an athlete, like her father, the South was
quickly changing: by the early ’70s, more than 90 percent of black
children were attending desegregated schools.

Even so, Melissa Dent began her education at the same all-black
elementary school that her father had attended. In 1975, the Department
of Justice and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund hauled the district back
into court, not long before a federal agency placed the Tuscaloosa
system on its list of the nation’s worst civil-rights offenders. The
case landed on the docket of Judge Frank McFadden, a Yale Law–educated
former Wall Street attorney born in Oxford, Mississippi.

McFadden, now 88, with a shock of white hair, still practices law in
Montgomery, and he recently described the predicament he found himself
in some 40 years ago. The Supreme Court had been right in striking down
legal segregation, McFadden said. The details of the Jim Crow era—how
the words *white supremacy* were written on Alabama’s Democratic Party
ballot, or how even which line you stood in at the liquor store depended
on your race—remained vivid for the former judge. “Separate but equal
was a joke, a horrible joke,” he told me.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/notched_timeline/610d8a967.jpg)**[INTERACTIVE
HISTORY](http://www.propublica.org/special/timeline-from-brown-v.-board-to-segregation-now):**
From *Brown v. Board* to today’s resegregation

But by the time the Tuscaloosa case hit his desk, McFadden said, *Brown*
had stood as the law of the land for two decades and the legal barriers
to integration had been eliminated. “The plaintiffs were contending that
the absence of integration equals the presence of segregation, and they
are not necessarily the same.” The Justice Department and the Legal
Defense Fund were asserting that “if there was a racial imbalance in the
student body, then that in and of itself established segregation, and
some remedy had to happen.”

McFadden disagreed. “What was being sought in the Tuscaloosa case when
it came to me was a forced integration,” he said. “If you read my orders
in the Tuscaloosa case and what I said in the courtroom, it was simply
this: *Brown v. Board of Education* said you cannot send a child to a
specific school because of his or her race, and that is precisely what
affirmative action was requiring to be done.”

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/processed_0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_McFadden002_V1/f5121da94.jpg)Former
Judge Frank McFadden, 88, presided over the case that resulted in the
creation of a single, integrated high school for all of Tuscaloosa’s
students, in 1979. The school would be split apart 21 years later.

McFadden admitted to me that much of the segregation once required by
law remained, even though the laws no longer did. He noted that
segregation had its roots in slavery, and that white attitudes toward
black Americans had hardened over the centuries.

related story

### In Memphis, the Ghost of Segregation Lingers On

"The gap closes when folks go to school together, when they play
together, when they're in afterschool programs together, and when they
live in the same communities together."

[Read the full February 2012
story](http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2012/02/in-memphis-classrooms-the-ghost-of-segregation-lingers-on/252992/)
by Sarah Garland

But when asked how the country could have addressed the resistance to
integration if the courts hadn’t forced it, he turned philosophical.
“You would have sunk the first slave ship, cut that all out, and not
brought them in here,” he said, his honeyed Oxford drawl softening the
bite in his words. “How one would accomplish desegregation in an ideal
world, I don’t have that answer.” He raised his age-speckled hands,
palms up. “But before you have that ideal, human beings have to change
attitudes.”

The Tuscaloosa case and others like it were hard, McFadden said. He
ultimately decided that Tuscaloosa’s efforts, centered on the creation
of neighborhood-based schools, were sufficient, because he believed the
school segregation that remained resulted from housing patterns. But the
Supreme Court had already made clear that disproportionately black
schools in districts with a history of legal segregation were highly
suspicious, and that housing-based segregation could not justify
all-black schools in these districts. In overruling McFadden, the
federal appeals court noted that the virtually all-black Druid High was
not even two miles from the mostly white Tuscaloosa High. McFadden
eventually presided over a series of changes, including the creation of
Central as the city’s sole public high school.

In the fall of 1979, Central High School opened to serve all
public-high-school students in the district—no matter their race, no
matter whether they lived in the city’s public-housing projects or in
one of the mansions along the meandering Black Warrior River. The
mega-school, a creative solution to a complex problem, resulted from
many hours of argument and negotiation in McFadden’s chambers. It was
spread across two campuses—ninth- and 10th-graders at the former black
high school, now called Central West; 11th- and 12th-graders at the old
white high school, called Central East. (The judge’s order also created
three single-grade middle schools.)

All traces of the segregated system, from the mascots to the school
colors of the two former schools, were discarded. All of Tuscaloosa’s
public-high-school students would now unite under the red-and-white
banner of the Falcons. As one of the biggest schools in the state,
Central would offer classes in subjects ranging from Latin to forensics.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/AL_Central_Update_PT1_010/49d62f828.jpg)During
the 1980s, Central’s football stadium hosted a racially integrated
championship team. Today, the student body is 99 percent black.

Over the years, Central racked up debate-team championships. Its math
team dominated at state competitions. The cheerleaders tumbled their way
to nationals, and the Falcons football team trounced local competitors
so badly, some refused to play against it. Central students were
regularly named National Merit Scholars. In 2001, the state found
Central’s projected dropout rate to be less than half Alabama’s average.

“Central and its resources could reach any child,” said Robert Coates, a
former principal of the school.

The school was hardly perfect. Black students were disproportionately
funneled into vocational classes, and white students into honors
classes. Some parents complained that competitive opportunities were
limited to just the very best students and athletes because the school,
at 2,300 students, was so large. And the white flight that had begun
when the courts first ordered the district to desegregate continued,
slowly, after the formation of the mega-school. But despite these
challenges, large numbers of black students studied the same robust
curriculum as white students, and students of both races mixed
peacefully and thrived.

Desegregation had been wrenching and complicated, but in Tuscaloosa and
across the country, it achieved undeniable results. During the 1970s and
’80s, the achievement gap between black and white 13-year-olds was cut
roughly in half nationwide. Some scholars argue that desegregation had a
negligible effect on overall academic achievement. But the overwhelming
body of research shows that once black children were given access to
advanced courses, well-trained teachers, and all the other resources
that tend to follow white, middle-income children, they began to catch
up.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/processed_dent_yearbook-1/9fbd006f6.jpg)Melissa
Dent’s photo in the class of 1988 yearbook

A 2014 study conducted by Rucker Johnson, a public-policy professor at
the University of California at Berkeley, published by the National
Bureau of Economic Research, found desegregation’s impact on racial
equality to be deep, wide, and long-lasting. Johnson examined data on a
representative sample of 8,258 American adults born between 1945 and
1968, whom he followed through 2011. He found that black Americans who
attended schools integrated by court order were more likely to graduate,
go on to college, and earn a degree than black Americans who attended
segregated schools. They made more money: five years of integrated
schooling increased the earnings of black adults by 15 percent. They
were significantly less likely to spend time in jail. They were
healthier.

Notably, Rucker also found that black progress did not come at the
expense of white Americans—white students in integrated schools did just
as well academically as those in segregated schools. Other studies have
found that attending integrated schools made white students more likely
to later live in integrated neighborhoods and send their own children to
racially diverse schools.

Melissa Dent attended her first integrated class as a middle-schooler,
in 1980, as a result of the court order. But by the time she graduated
from Central eight years later, integration in the South had already
reached its high-water mark. The percentage of black and white students
attending school together would never be greater.

At Central, Dent quickly made a name for herself as a premier athlete.
Her track team took the state title twice, and she was named Alabama’s
top female high-school track performer in 1987. More important, the
school introduced her to people from different backgrounds. Neither her
mother nor her father had gone to college, yet her classmates—some of
whose fathers were attorneys or business owners—planted that seed. “All
my friends were talking about college and wanting to do better,” she
told me. “I’ve always been ambitious, and I wanted to do better too.”

As part of the first generation born outside the constraints of Jim
Crow, Dent has not lived out a Horatio Alger Jr. fable. Much like the
story of integration, her story is one of fits and starts, of grinding
progress and battles to hang on to the gains. In her sophomore year of
college, she got pregnant. She came back home and had her baby. But she
then returned to school, walking onto the track team at the University
of Alabama and graduating in 1995.

Now 45 and a single mother of four, she works on the assembly line at
the Mercedes-Benz plant just outside of town. Her work is physically
taxing, but she fought to get the factory gig, a coveted job in the
area, because it paid more than she’d ever earned as a teaching
assistant, the job she had after college. Unlike her father, she owns
her West End home, a brick fixer-upper she bought eight years ago, after
falling in love with its den and big backyard.

Dent called herself “average, very average,” as a student, but like her
own parents, she hopes that education will take her children further
than it has taken her.

Five years of integrated schooling increased the earnings of black
adults by 15 percent.

Her children’s academic medals and certificates clutter the living-room
walls in her house. It is clear in conversation that Melissa never
expected to count the opportunity for a quality education among the
things she would be unable to provide for her children. She said she’d
assumed that she’d be the bridge between her father’s Jim Crow
generation and a new generation for whom integration was natural.

Dent said her high-school class had formed a lasting bond. Even now, she
said, if she called on any of her white fellow alums, like the prominent
lawyer she’d reconnected with during a recent class reunion, they would
remember her. She believes D’Leisha, a child every bit as outgoing as
her mother is reserved, would have formed a rainbow coalition of friends
if she’d attended the old Central, and made connections that could have
helped her in the future.

She glanced at D’Leisha. “My girls are not experiencing that.”

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_DeLeisha002_V3/49967e117.jpg)D’Leisha
Dent is the homecoming queen at Central High School. She is also the
class president and an honors student, yet she has only marginal college
prospects.

### III. D’Leisha

A few minutes before first period on a Wednesday last October, D’Leisha
Dent, a 17-year-old senior, waded through Central High’s halls, toes
with chipped blue polish peeking out from her sandals, orange jeans
hugging solid legs that had helped make her the three-time state indoor
shot-put champion.

She eventually broke free from a tangle of girls to enter Tyrone Jones’s
Advanced Placement English class and take her seat at the front. She
dropped two black bags taut with notebooks and binders beside her desk.

Jones didn’t waste time setting the boisterous class to task. The AP
exam was approaching. Students who didn’t score high enough wouldn’t get
college credit for the class. Even though the 17 girls and boys gathered
in front of him made up Central’s brightest, their practice essay about
a poem hadn’t gone so well.

D’Leisha raised her hand, her brow furrowed. How many kids had made the
cutoff last year? she asked. Only two students had, but the teacher
dodged the question. “I really do believe all of you can make those
scores,” he said.

“You always tell us to look up the word. How are we supposed to look a
word up if we don’t know to spell it?”

He passed out an essay question about D. H. Lawrence’s novel *The
Rainbow*. As the students began to write, a girl sitting to his left
scrunched up her nose and raised her hand. She couldn’t spell a word she
wanted to use in her essay. Jones told her to look it up in one of the
heavy red dictionaries in the baskets below their desks.

“You know what I don’t understand?” the girl said, a pen poised at her
lips. “You always tell us to look up the word. How are we supposed to
look a word up if we don’t know to spell it?”

Jones stopped. His eyes scanned each of the 17 brown faces looking
expectantly back at him. Then he gave an answer that seemed to sum up
their educational experience. “What do we say about struggling?” he
asked. “You have to work through the struggle.”

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_Central012_V1/15aa39bc2.jpg)Central
band members march to the school’s homecoming football game.

After Melissa Dent graduated, in 1988, Central continued as one of the
state’s standout high schools. But over time, local leaders grew more
concerned about the students who didn’t attend the school than those who
did.

White students once accounted for a majority of the Tuscaloosa school
district’s students. But by the mid-1990s, they made up less than a
third. Total enrollment had dropped from 13,500 in 1969 to 10,300 in
1995. Many white parents had decided to send their children to nearly
all-white private schools or to move across the city line to access the
heavily white Tuscaloosa County Schools.

Tuscaloosa’s business leaders and elected officials had witnessed the
transformation of other southern cities after their school districts had
reached a tipping point—the point at which white parents become
unsettled by the rising share of black students in a school, and pull
their children from the school en masse. School districts in cities such
as Birmingham and Richmond had seen their integration efforts largely
mooted: just about all the white students had left. As white families
had moved out to the suburbs, eroding the tax base, both the schools and
the cities themselves had suffered. Many officials in Tuscaloosa
obsessed about the rippling consequences of continued white flight.
“Money follows kids, and the loss of white students was very, very
critical,” said Shelley Jones, who is white and served as a school-board
member in the 1990s, and later as the chair.

In some ways, all-black schools today are worse than Druid High was back
in the 1950s, when poor black students mixed with affluent and
middle-class ones.

Tuscaloosa’s residential population stagnated during the ’90s, and the
school situation took on special urgency in 1993: Tuscaloosa was vying
for the Mercedes-Benz plant where Melissa Dent now works, which
officials hoped would draw people to the city. Just a few years earlier,
Tuscaloosa had lost out on a bid for a Saturn plant. In an interview
early this year, Johnnie Aycock, who at the time headed the Chamber of
Commerce of West Alabama, suggested the schools had scared Saturn away.
“We learned that lesson. We learned that lesson completely.”

Publicly, the city’s movers and shakers said the lack of neighborhood
schools made the district unattractive and that schools languished in
disrepair because the district had to await court approval for every
little decision. Behind closed doors, they argued that if they did not
create some schools where white students made up the majority—or near
it—they’d lose the white parents still remaining.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/notched_sixwords/15061ecd4.jpg)**[STUDENT
VOICES](http://www.propublica.org/article/six-words-on-race-and-education-in-america)**:
Tuscaloosa high school students share their feelings about segregation.

Districts under desegregation orders aren’t supposed to take actions
that increase racial separation. And so the city’s leadership decided
the desegregation order needed to go, and they believed the time was
ripe for a court to agree.

In the early 1990s, an increasingly conservative Supreme Court had
issued several crucial rulings that made it much easier for school
systems to get out from under court supervision. The Court ruled that
desegregation orders were never meant to be permanent, but rather were a
“temporary measure to remedy past discrimination,” and that school
decisions should return to local control once a district had shown a
“good faith” effort to eliminate segregation. Because of changing racial
demographics and housing patterns, the Court also ruled that districts
no longer had to prove that they’d eliminated segregation “root and
branch,” just that they’d done so to the “extent practicable.” Once
released, a school board could assign students however it chose, as long
as no proof existed that it did so for discriminatory reasons.

[![image](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures2&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=2)](http://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/jump?iu=%2F4624%2FTheAtlanticOnline%2Ffeatures&t=src%3D%26pos%3Dleaderbottomfeatures2&sz=300x250%7C320x50%7C728x90%7C970x250&c=857697270&tile=2)

In 1993, Tuscaloosa’s school board fired a test shot. It filed papers in
federal court seeking to build a new elementary school called Rock
Quarry, deep in a nearly all-white part of town separated from the rest
of the city by the Black Warrior River. If a judge accepted the school,
that might signal a willingness to end the order altogether. The case
landed in the courtroom of Judge Sharon Blackburn, a recent George H. W.
Bush appointee who had gone to college in Tuscaloosa.

In 1995, Blackburn held a five-day hearing to decide the question of
Rock Quarry. School officials promised that the new school’s student
body, though whiter than the district’s overall school population, would
be half black.

The roster of witnesses lined up behind the school board shocked many in
the black community. It included some of the city’s most influential
black leaders, including a city councilman, a state senator, and Judge
John England Jr., whose credentials carried force. England had been a
member of the first integrated class at the University of Alabama Law
School, and he’d fought discrimination his whole career as a litigator,
before taking on roles as a city-council member and then as a county
judge.

England testified as to how the city’s racial views had changed over the
years. Building a school “across the river,” England told the court, was
“the best thing for the community as a whole.”

Rumors spread within the community that England’s and others’ support
had been part of a secret arrangement with white leaders. Dennis Parker,
an attorney for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, asked England during his
testimony whether he’d said at a public meeting that a deal had been
struck to improve a West End school in exchange for support for a new
school in the whitest part of town. England denied that any such deal
had been made, and Blackburn gave the nod to the new school. Soon
thereafter, the school board voted to go back to court to seek release
from federal oversight.

“You can’t know how strongly I feel about our history of racial
injustice,” the judge said. “But I’m doing what I believe the law
requires me to do.”

The Legal Defense Fund had by that time started supporting the release
of districts from federal court orders, settling cases in return for
promises that the districts would voluntarily continue some
desegregation efforts. It had seen the writing on the wall: “There
seemed almost a fatigue with the cases” on the part of judges, “and a
desire to get them finished,” Parker told me. And beginning in the
Reagan administration, the Justice Department had started to walk away
from the court orders.

A negotiated agreement, supported by the Legal Defense Fund and the
Justice Department, to end Tuscaloosa’s federal desegregation order was
brought before Judge Blackburn in 1998. School leaders publicly pledged
to continue desegregation efforts, and Superintendent Bob Winter said
that no new schools, which might lead to less integration, were planned.

Still, Blackburn, before making what she called the most significant
ruling of her time on the bench, ordered a hearing. About 50 people
showed up, and many urged her to reject the settlement. Emotions were
raw. “I wouldn’t be up here if I didn’t think someone was trying to harm
my children,” Chykeitha Roshell told the local paper.

Before granting the request to free the district, Blackburn seemed to
speak to Tuscaloosa’s black community. “I don’t know any of you all, and
you don’t know me,” she said. “I grew up in Alabama in the ’60s, in a
small town in south Alabama … You can’t know my views about segregation
and how strongly I feel about our state and our history of racial
injustice.” She acknowledged the crowd’s sentiment, saying, “You don’t
understand why I’m doing this, and you think I’m wrong. But I’m doing
what I believe the law requires me to do.” And with that, Blackburn
announced that the 30-year-old desegregation order had come to an end.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_JudgeEngland003_V1/928c73194.jpg)Judge
John England Jr., believes the breakup of the old, integrated schools
was inevitable.

In an interview last fall in his chambers at the Tuscaloosa County
Courthouse, Judge England said on the record for the first time that he
had privately agreed to support the Rock Quarry school during the
trial—which would ultimately lead to the district’s release from federal
oversight—only with the assurance of investment in West End schools,
though he denied having made a quid pro quo deal. (Several others
confirmed that white business, school, and city officials met privately
with select black leaders to gain support for the district’s efforts to
end the court order and free it to return to neighborhood schools, in
exchange for new black schools and development in the West End.) The day
of our interview, the story had broken nationally that England’s
step-granddaughter had been snubbed by the white sororities at the
University of Alabama—among the nation’s last remaining segregated Greek
systems. The judge, a university trustee, was in a foul mood.

His retelling of the events leading up to the dismissal revealed none of
the optimism he’d displayed on the stand all those years ago, but rather
a steely pragmatism and no small measure of disillusionment. Under the
court order, England said, black students had ridden buses all over the
city chasing an ever-receding white population. Desegregation had not
ended the stigmatization of black children, England said. It had
reinforced it.

England had believed that if the school system continued to grow more
black, financial support for schools within the white community would
fall off and the city would struggle to attract commerce. Further, he’d
thought that the school district would eventually free itself of federal
oversight with or without the support of black leaders.

“There was a desire to have a school built across the river, where a
number of white students were in private school,” he said. “The business
community wanted to be able to say Tuscaloosa City Schools would not be
an inner-city school system.”

At least the prospect of his cooperation, along with that of other black
elites, offered leverage. So England and a handful of others made a
Faustian bargain. In exchange for their support for building new schools
in the whitest part of town, he said, white leaders promised to build
some state-of-the-art schools in Tuscaloosa’s West End, providing local
development to a part of town with little more than factories and dollar
stores. “They kept their word to build schools on this side, we kept
ours,” England said. “White folks got your schools. Black folks, you got
yours.”

England knew this arrangement meant consigning hundreds of black
students to segregated schools. And he never disputed that integration
had brought real academic benefits. But he saw few options and had also
grown nostalgic about his own years in Jim Crow schools. “I would put
the education I got against anyone’s,” he said. “The answer cannot be
‘The only way to get good schools is to have white people in them.’ ”

The hearings opened a rift in Tuscaloosa’s black community, dividing
longtime friends. Many still accuse the judge and others of selling out,
a charge that snapped the judge upright in his chair.

Black children in the South now attend majority-black schools at levels
not seen in four decades.

“Those people had their right to their viewpoint as I had mine,” he
said, his voice rising. “I thought I saw the whole picture.” England
said he still stands behind the decision he made to support Rock Quarry.
But as far as segregation was concerned, he added, “I don’t know what
happened the last 13 years.”

What happened was rapid and continual resegregation, in particular the
sequestration of poor black students in nearly hopeless schools. It is
no small irony that efforts to woo the very plant that allows Melissa
Dent to earn enough to support her family also played a part in ensuring
that her children would attend nearly all-black schools.

In 1999, less than a year after Blackburn’s public hearing, the school
board voted to abandon its three single-grade, citywide middle schools
in favor of more-traditional middle schools. It carved out two
integrated schools to serve sixth-through-eighth-graders in the
northern, central, and eastern parts of the city, and returned Westlawn
Middle, in the West End, to its familiar historic state: virtually all
black.

The school board commissioned a biracial committee to figure out what to
do about the high school. White parents, the commission suggested in its
May 2000 report, would not want their children to attend schools once
they turned 70 percent black. By its reasoning, the district had already
reached the tipping point. The only way to create the necessary school
ratios in a district where black students outnumbered white students
almost three to one was to cluster a large number of black children in
schools without white students.

The commission pointed to a handful of studies showing that smaller
schools benefited low-income students. It did not note that Westlawn
Middle School was floundering: the state’s Department of Education had
already placed the school under a warning for low achievement.

After the commission issued its report, the district created a plan for
two large integrated high schools—Northridge, in the whitest and most
affluent part of town, and Paul W. Bryant, along the city’s eastern
edge—as well as a much smaller high school that would retain the name
Central. School officials drew Central’s proposed attendance zone
compactly around the West End, saying that an all-black high school
couldn’t be avoided, because the district couldn’t help where people
lived.

While a vocal group of white parents and community leaders supported the
high-school breakup, large numbers of black and white residents fought
against it. A poll of a few dozen parents who’d pulled their kids from
the schools showed that most of them supported a shift to neighborhood
high schools. But in a wider poll of more than 200 parents in the
district, and another of Central’s teachers and other staff, most
respondents wanted the mega-school to remain intact. Robert Coates had
just been named principal of the Central East campus, and he warned the
board that if it went forward with the plan to split the schools, the
new Central would be “relegated as a low-performing school from day
one.”

Nonetheless, in August 2000, the seven-member board ordered Central’s
dismantling, 21 years after its creation. One black member joined the
board’s four white ones in voting in favor. Under the plan, some black
students would continue to be bused north of the river, though many of
them were from black neighborhoods filled with two-parent, two-garage
homes, as Ernestine Tucker, a current school-board member, puts it.
Overall, the vote ensured that nearly a third of the district’s black
students would spend their entire 13 years of public education in
completely segregated schools.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_RockQuarry001_V1/1d7d388de.jpg)The
racial composition of Tuscaloosa’s schools varies dramatically, from 9
percent black at Rock Quarry Elementary School (above), to 99 percent
black at Central High School, where D’Leisha Dent is a senior.

And so the district built its new high schools—but white parents did not
flock to them. By 2007, white enrollment had fallen to 22 percent, and
school leaders once again insisted something had to be done. The
superintendent presented a plan that would send hundreds of black
children who were still being bused to high-performing, integrated
schools back to failing schools closer to their homes. The idea was that
this latest plan would do what the breaking-apart of Central hadn’t:
draw back white parents.

The redistricting plan roiled the community, still raw over the breakup
of the integrated middle and high schools less than a decade earlier. A
racially mixed group of local academics and parents fired off searing
editorials and showed up at meetings to protest.

But some parents were unhappy with the plan for a different set of
reasons. The historic district around the University of Alabama, a
predominantly white and middle-class area that’s home to college
professors and other professionals, lies south of the river. The
district’s plan would reassign children in this neighborhood to their
closest schools, which were heavily black.

The day before the school board voted, the president of the historic
district association sent an e‑mail to his fellow association members
assuring them that after “lengthy negotiations with the school board
attorney” and “discussions with school board members and the
superintendent,” students in the district would be able to continue to
attend the north-of-the-river schools. The school board’s final proposal
did indeed reflect that change. The final plan also allowed children
from a tiny triangle conspicuously carved from the West End—encompassing
a country club and its surrounding neighborhood—to attend school north
of the river.

On May 3, 2007, as the school board prepared to vote on the new plan, a
few members said they had been unaware of the negotiations, and fought
unsuccessfully to delay the decision. The plan passed in a bitterly
divided vote, 5–3. One white school-board member, Virginia Powell, who
represented the historic district around the university, joined the
board’s two black members in voting no. Powell said that the appeasement
of white parents had trumped doing what was best educationally for the
district. “It was totally orchestrated. It was awful, I felt powerless,”
Powell told me recently. “I remember sitting in church after one of the
votes. It was a Wednesday-night supper and no one would sit with me,
because I voted with the black members. It made me realize where people
stood.”

Since the vote, the black population at Rock Quarry, one of the
district’s highest-performing elementary schools—the one that school
officials had promised would be 50-50 in its racial composition—has
fallen from 24 percent to 9 percent. The U.S. Department of Education’s
Office of Civil Rights has opened an investigation into allegations of
racial discrimination in how the district assigns students, including
the 2007 redistricting plan.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_Central001_V1/4fe3548dc.jpg)Central’s
principal, Clarence Sutton Jr. says it’s hard to explain to his students
why white children living within sight of Central attend a different
public school.

When President George W. Bush came into office, approximately 595 school
districts nationwide—including dozens of non-southern districts—remained
under court-ordered desegregation, according to a ProPublica analysis of
data compiled by Stanford University researchers. By the end of Bush’s
second term, that number had plummeted to 380. Nearly 60 percent of all
the districts that have been released from their desegregation orders
since 1967 were released under Bush, whose administration pressed the
Justice Department to close those cases wherever possible. The trend has
slowed under the Obama administration, but it has continued. Today,
about 340 districts remain under court order.

A 2012 Stanford study examined school districts with at least 2,000
students that had been released from court order since 1990, finding
that, typically, these districts grew steadily more segregated after
their release. A separate study found that within 10 years of being
released, school districts on average unwound about 60 percent of the
integration they had achieved under court order.

One troubling truth is that, as witnessed in Tuscaloosa, backing away
from integration doesn’t typically arrest or reverse the outflow of
white students from diverse school districts. The Stanford researchers
found that school systems’ white populations slightly declined after
court orders ended. Many districts nonetheless continue to embrace the
type of gerrymandering at play in Tuscaloosa. After comprehensively
examining attendance zones across the country, Meredith Richards at the
University of Pennsylvania’s Institute of Education Sciences found in a
recent study that they are nearly as irregular as legislative districts.

By the time students get to Central, most have spent nine years in
low-performing, virtually all-black schools.

Some districts, of course, have gerrymandered to increase integration.
Kentucky’s Jefferson County Public Schools, serving Louisville, are
often held up as an example. The battle for desegregation had been
violent there, but eventually the community came to value its integrated
schools. When the superintendent began pressing to end the district’s
elementary-school busing program, Jefferson County’s business leaders
met with residents but came to a very different conclusion from the one
reached in Tuscaloosa. They decided to support continued integration
efforts, because they deemed integrated schools good for business. Even
though its court supervision ended in 2000, Jefferson County remains one
of the most integrated urban districts in the country.

But Jefferson County is the rarest of cases. Few communities seem able
to summon the political will to continue integration efforts. And the
Obama administration, while saying integration is important, offers
almost no incentives that would entice school districts to increase it.
Instead, Richards says, districts have typically gerrymandered “to
segregate, particularly whites from blacks,” and that gerrymandering is
“getting worse over time” as federal oversight diminishes. According to
an analysis by ProPublica, the number of apartheid schools nationwide
has mushroomed from 2,762 in 1988—the peak of school integration—to
6,727 in 2011.

When school officials make decisions that funnel poor children of color
into their own schools, they promise to make those separate schools
equal. But that promise is as false today as it was in 1954. Indeed, in
some ways all-black schools today are worse than Druid High was back in
the 1950s, when poor black students mixed with affluent and middle-class
ones, and when many of the most talented black residents of Tuscaloosa
taught there.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/AL_Dent_Feb_011/226c88718.jpg)D’Leisha’s
medals clutter her mother’s house. Her college prospects largely hinge
on the tenuous promise of a coach at a small, historically black college
outside of Birmingham.

High-poverty, segregated black and Latino schools account for the
majority of the roughly 1,400 high schools nationwide labeled “dropout
factories”—meaning fewer than 60 percent of the students graduate.
School officials often blame poor performance on the poverty these kids
grow up in. But most studies conclude that it’s the concentration of
poor students in the same school that hurts them the most. Low-income
students placed in middle-income schools show marked academic progress.

As a school’s black population increases, the odds that any given
teacher there will have significant experience, full licensure, or a
master’s degree all decline. Teacher turnover at segregated schools is
typically high. And black students, overall, are less likely than any
other group of students to attend schools with Advanced Placement
courses and high-level classes like calculus.

The night the Tuscaloosa school board voted to split up the old Central,
board member Bryan Chandler pledged that there would be no winners and
losers. Yet while Northridge offered students a dozen Advanced Placement
classes, the new Central went at least five years without a single one.
Journalism awards stretch wall to wall in Northridge’s newspaper
classroom, but for the better part of a decade, Central students didn’t
have a school newspaper or a yearbook. Until last year, Central didn’t
even offer physics.

The same superintendent who oversaw the 2007 redistricting reportedly
called Tuscaloosa’s all-black schools a “dumping ground” for bad
teachers who’d been let go from other district schools. Teachers hired
from outside Tuscaloosa were, for many years, allowed to apply to
specific schools, and some would not apply to black schools.

By the time students get to Central, most have spent nine years in
low-performing, virtually all-black schools. More than 80 percent of
them come from families with incomes low enough to qualify them for free
or reduced-price school lunches. Earlier this year, the state of Alabama
designated Central and Westlawn Middle School as failing, because they’d
performed in the lowest 6 percent of the state’s schools for at least
three of the previous six years.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/newsroom/img/posts/2014/04/0514_WEL_HannahJones_Tuscaloosa_Dent006_V1/34a832a7e.jpg)D’Leisha
Dent has retaken the ACT three times to try to raise her score. At a
practice session with students from other high schools, she observed,
“They knew things we didn’t know. They had done things we hadn’t done.”

D’Leisha arrived at Central in 2010, the same year as its new principal,
Clarence Sutton Jr., who’d attended the integrated version of the school
as Melissa Dent’s classmate. A year later, the district hired a new
superintendent, Paul McKendrick.

Sitting in his office, at a desk six inches deep in papers and reports,
McKendrick, a bespectacled man, quiet but forceful, said the black,
mostly poor kids of the West End had been separated and written off. A
recent audit of Central had found that 80 percent of students were not
on the college track. The low test scores that have plagued the school
don’t stem from “a child problem,” he told me. “You may have some
children that have special needs or cognitive issues, but you are not
going to say a whole group of kids” has “lost intelligence in some way.”

Though its students may arrive bearing more burdens, in many ways
Central is like any other high school. It’s got its jocks, its nerds,
its mean girls and band geeks. D’Leisha herself is the all-American
girl—the homecoming queen dating a football player. But students and
staff say most people see only one thing about Central: it’s all black.
And that still bears a stigma. The school is housed in a lovely modern
brick building outside of the West End, within view of the towering
University of Alabama football stadium. Much of the neighborhood
surrounding it is middle-class and predominantly white. Too many times,
Sutton told me, his students have asked why the kids who live across the
street don’t attend their school. Most have never had a white classmate
or neighbor, he said, leaving them unprepared to navigate a country
where those in charge are usually white.

The principal struggles to explain to students how the segregation they
experience is any different from the old version simply because no law
requires it. “It is hard, it is a tough conversation, and it is a
conversation I don’t think we as adults want to have.”

Standing one day last fall outside the counselor’s office at Central,
D’Leisha looked up at the college bulletin board. It was dominated by
National Guard and Army flyers, with some brochures for small Alabama
colleges tucked among them. Students with D’Leisha’s grades and tough
honors coursework often come home to mailboxes stuffed with glossy
college brochures. But most days, nothing showed up in the mail for her,
and no colleges had come calling. She had taken the ACT college-entrance
exam twice already. The first time she scored a 16, the second time a
17. Her mother’s alma mater, the University of Alabama, expects a 21,
the national average. Many four-year colleges will not even consider
students who score below an 18.

The low test scores that have plagued the school don’t stem from “a
child problem,” says the new superintendent.

“My biggest fear right now is the ACT,” D’Leisha said. “I don’t have a
good score. It’s been on my mind a lot.” She described an ACT study
session she’d attended last summer at a community college. “We were with
kids from Northridge, and they knew things we didn’t know,” she said.
“They had done things we hadn’t done.”

Because D’Leisha excels in school and everything else she’s involved in,
her teachers and counselors don’t worry about whether she’s on the right
track. They’re stretched thin trying to keep in class the
seniors—roughly 35 percent of them—who fail to graduate each year. But
in December, at home texting with her boyfriend, D’Leisha admitted that
she’d filled out only one college application. Lately, she said, she’d
been looking more closely at those military brochures, just as her
grandfather had, something that angers her mother. “I am kind of
clueless how to get stuff done for college,” D’Leisha told me, looking
down and fidgeting with her phone. “They are supposed to be helping us,
but they think because I am the class president I know what to do.
Sometimes I don’t speak up, because I know people have expectations of
me.”

For black students like D’Leisha—the grandchildren of the historic
*Brown* decision—having to play catch-up with their white counterparts
is supposed to be a thing of the past. The promise was that students of
all colors would be educated side by side, and would advance together
into a more integrated, equitable American society. Polls show Americans
embracing this promise in the abstract, but that rarely translates into
on-the-ground support for integration efforts.

Late last year, D’Leisha took the ACT for the third time, but her score
dropped back to 16. So early on a Saturday in February, she got up
quietly, forced a few bites of a muffin into her nervous stomach, and
drove once again to the community college where the test is
administered. A few weeks later, she got her score: 16 again. She
contemplated a fifth attempt, but could see little point.

A few months earlier, D’Leisha had talked about how much she looked
forward to meeting people from different cultures at college and sitting
in a racially mixed classroom for the first time. But her college hopes
are thinner now than she’d expected then. As of this writing, they
largely hinge on the tenuous promise of a coach at a small, historically
black college outside of Birmingham, who has told her that the school
will have a place for her despite her score. No official offer of
admission has yet arrived.

-   [Facebook](#)
-   [Twitter](#)
-   [LinkedIn](#)
-   [Google+](#)
-   [Email](mailto:?subject=The%20Atlantic:%20Segregation%20Now%20...%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20&body=Sixty%20years%20after%C2%A0Brown%20v.%20Board%20of%20Education%2C%20the%20schools%20in%20Tuscaloosa%2C%20Alabama%2C%20show%20how%20separate%20and%20unequal%20education%20is%20coming%20back.%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%0A%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20Read%20this:%0A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/04/segregation-now/359813/)
-   [Comments](#disqus_thread)

-   Nikole Hannah-Jones is an investigative reporter at ProPublica, an
    independent, nonprofit newsroom in New York City.
    -   [All Posts](/nikole-hannah-jones/)

Most Popular on The Atlantic
----------------------------

-   [![Four Words to Seem More
    Polite](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/empathycombined/thumb_wide.jpg)
    Four Words to Seem More
    Polite](http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/08/four-words-are-the-key-to-seeming-polite/376113/)
-   [![How Racism Creeps Into Medicine
    ](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/shutterstock_3259222/thumb_wide.jpg)
    How Racism Creeps Into
    Medicine](http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/08/how-racism-creeps-into-medicine/378618/)
-   [![The Dark Side of Almond
    Use](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/angryalmond/thumb_wide.jpg)
    The Dark Side of Almond
    Use](http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/08/almonds-demon-nuts/379244/)
-   [![Man Arrested While Picking Up His Kids: 'The Problem Is I'm
    Black'](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2014/08/police_ddd/thumb_wide.png)
    Man Arrested While Picking Up His Kids: 'The Problem Is I'm
    Black'](http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/08/the-problem-is-im-black/379357/)

-   [CityLab](/)
-   [Share](#)
-   [Tweet](#)
-   [Menu](#)

Follow The Atlantic
===================

-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/TheAtlantic)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/TheAtlantic)
-   [LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/today/theatlantic.com)
-   [Google +](https://plus.google.com/109258622984321091629/posts)
-   [RSS](/follow-the-atlantic/#rssFeeds)
-   [App Store](http://wda.biz/mrmxub)
-   [Play
    Store](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.theatlantic.weekly_android)

E-Newsletters
=============

-   Today's Top Stories
-   This Week
-   This Month
-   New at In Focus
-   CityLab: Today’s Top Stories
-   CityLab: This Week’s Most Popular Stories
-   5 Best Columns
-   Today’s Top News from The Wire
-   Top Videos of the Week

I want to receive updates from partners and sponsors.

About The Atlantic
==================

-   [FAQ](/faq/)
-   [Store](/store/)
-   [Atlantic Media](http://atlanticmedia.com/)
-   [Advertise](http://advertising.theatlantic.com/)
-   [Site Map](/site-map/)
-   [Masthead](/masthead/)
-   [Emporium](/emporium/)
-   [Jobs](/jobs/)
-   [Advertising Guidelines](/advertise/)
-   [Terms and Conditions](/terms-and-conditions/)
-   [Contact Us](/contact/)
-   [Atlantic Scene](/atlantic-scene/)
-   [Press](/press/)
-   [Privacy](/privacy-policy/)

Subscribe
=========

[Subscribe Help](https://ssl.palmcoastd.com/23301/apps/CSMAIN)

[Fraud
Alert](/personal/archive/2013/10/fraud-alert-regarding-i-the-atlantic-i/280278/)

Get 10 issues a year at 65% off the cover price, plus unlimited digital
access.

![image](http://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/issues/2014/08/13/0914_Cover/medium.jpg)

State AK AL AR AZ CA CO CT DC DE FL GA HI IA ID IL IN KS KY LA MA MD ME
MI MN MO MS MT NC ND NE NH NJ NM NV NY OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VA
VT WA WI WV WY YT Next

Copyright © 2014 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights Reserved.

[CDN](http://www.edgecast.com/) powered by Edgecast Networks. Insights
powered by [Parsely](http://www.parsely.com/)

The Atlantic

Continue ()

Advertisement

![image](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6463921&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![image](//www.bizographics.com/collect/?pid=1016&fmt=gif)

[Powered by the Parse.ly Publisher Platform (P3).](http://parsely.com)

![image](//search.spotxchange.com/track/tag/7319.4514/img)

![image](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1407501962855831&ev=NoScript)

'); $('body').append($script); }

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/04/segregation-now/359813/
