**Welcome** ([sign
in](/account/signin/?next=/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/wonder-boys-genius/)
| [sign
up](https://subscribe.nybooks.info/ecom/nyb/app/live/web_user_maint?org=NYB&pagemode=a))

-   [** Google+](http://www.google.com/+nybooks)
-   [** Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/nybooks)
-   [** Twitter](http://twitter.com/nybooks)
-   [** RSS](/rss/)

[Shopping cart (0 items)](/catalog/cart/)

[**](#)
[![image](/media/static/assets/_assets/img/icon/nyrb_inv.png)](/?insrc=log)

[Advanced Search](/search/)

**Welcome** ([sign
in](/account/signin/?next=/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/wonder-boys-genius/)
| [sign
up](https://subscribe.nybooks.info/ecom/nyb/app/live/web_user_maint?org=NYB&pagemode=a))

-   [Shopping cart (0 items)](/catalog/cart/)
-   [Subscribe](/subscriptions/order/)
    -   [Start a Print
        Subscription](/subscriptions/order/ "Subscribe to The New York Review")
    -   [Print Premium
        Subscription](https://ssl.drgnetwork.com/ecom/NYB/app/live/subscriptions?&org=NYB&publ=NY&key_code=EXZXWWW&type=S&gift_key= "Start a Print Premium Subscription")
    -   [Give a Gift Subscription](/subscriptions/gift/ "Give a Gift")
    -   [Renew a Subscription](/renew/ "Renew your Subscriptions")
    -   [Online
        Edition](/subscriptions/online/ "Subscribe to the Online Edition")
    -   [Digital
        Editions](/subscriptions/digital-editions/ "Subscribe to a Digital Edition")
    -   [Academic/Institutional](/institution/ "Academic and Institutional Subscriptions")
    -   [Subscriber Alert](/subscriber-alert/ "Subscriber Alert!")

-   [Current Issue](/issues/current-issue/ "Table of Contents")
-   [Blogs](/blogs/)
    -   [NYRblog](/blogs/nyrblog/)
    -   [The Gallery](/blogs/gallery/)
    -   [Rereadings](/blogs/50-years/)

-   [Events](/events/ "Upcoming Events")
-   [Print Archive](/issues/)
-   [Classifieds](/classifieds/)
-   [Shop](/shop/ "Shop")
    -   [Illustrations](/galleries/)

-   [Newsletters](/newsletter/magazine/ "Sign Up for Our Newsletters")
-   [Books](/books/)

[![image](/media/static/assets/_assets/img/icon/NYRB.png)](/?insrc=log)

**

[Advanced Search](/search/)

-   [Subscribe](/subscriptions/order/)
    -   [Start a Print
        Subscription](/subscriptions/order/ "Subscribe to The New York Review")
    -   [Print Premium
        Subscription](https://ssl.drgnetwork.com/ecom/NYB/app/live/subscriptions?&org=NYB&publ=NY&key_code=EXZXWWW&type=S&gift_key= "Start a Print Premium Subscription")
    -   [Give a Gift Subscription](/subscriptions/gift/ "Give a Gift")
    -   [Renew a Subscription](/renew/ "Renew your Subscriptions")
    -   [Online
        Edition](/subscriptions/online/ "Subscribe to the Online Edition")
    -   [Digital
        Editions](/subscriptions/digital-editions/ "Subscribe to a Digital Edition")
    -   [Academic/Institutional](/institution/ "Academic and Institutional Subscriptions")
    -   [Subscriber Alert](/subscriber-alert/ "Subscriber Alert!")

-   [Current Issue](/issues/current-issue/ "Table of Contents")
-   [Blogs](/blogs/)
    -   [NYRblog](/blogs/nyrblog/)
    -   [The Gallery](/blogs/gallery/)
    -   [Rereadings](/blogs/50-years/)

-   [Events](/events/ "Upcoming Events")
-   [Print Archive](/issues/)
-   [Classifieds](/classifieds/)
-   [Shop](/shop/ "Shop")
    -   [Illustrations](/galleries/)

-   [Newsletters](/newsletter/magazine/ "Sign Up for Our Newsletters")
-   [![image](/media/static/assets/_assets/img/common/books.png)](/books/ "New York Review Books")

* * * * *

-   [Email](/mail_friend/5/26066/)
-   [Print](?pagination=false&printpage=true)
-   

-   [Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)
-   

Wonder Boys?
------------

[Tamsin Shaw](/contributors/tamsin-shaw/)

[October 9, 2014 Issue](/issues/2014/oct/09/)

#### [Divine Fury: A History of Genius](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0465003257?ie=UTF8&tag=thneyoreofbo-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0465003257)![image](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=thneyoreofbo-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0465003257)

by Darrin M. McMahon

Basic Books, 312 pp., $29.99

[![shaw\_1-100914.jpg](/media/photo/2014/09/17/shaw_1-100914_jpg_250x1234_q85.jpg)](/media/photo/2014/09/17/shaw_1-100914.jpg)

‘Faust’; etching by Rembrandt, circa 1652

Anyone who frequents research libraries in Europe or North America will
know that it is not unusual to encounter in them individuals who appear
to be rather introverted and yet sport oddly ostentatious hairstyles,
with unkempt shocks of hair sprouting with peculiar abandon from their
pallid male scalps. You can still encounter the odd Yeatsian dandy, but
the slightly disheveled Einsteinian archetype seems largely to have
prevailed in the academy, just as the Beethovenian archetype has long
prevailed in the world of music. This phenomenon alone, the slightly
embarrassing aping of the superficial attributes of genius, reveals an
ersatz quality to the idea of genius we have inherited; even in the most
solemn temples to intellectual achievement the notion is awkwardly
associated with a good deal that is theatrical, preposterous,
ridiculous.

Darrin McMahon’s *Divine Fury* does not shy away from the preposterous
and the ridiculous, or from the disturbing and dangerous. Many of us now
use the term “genius” as a simple expression of wonder, referring to a
person or an achievement that we find inexplicably brilliant. But as
McMahon’s rich narrative shows, across its long history the term has
accrued connotations that go far beyond this commonsense core, leading
us into the realms of superstition, bad science, and subservience to
questionable forms of authority. And yet his book ends on an unexpected
note of regret that “genius” in the most extravagant sense of the term
has given way to more trivial uses, to a culture in which everyone has a
genius for something and where even infants might be “baby Einsteins.”
The cult of the “great exception,” the unfathomably and inimitably great
human being, he tells us, has justifiably waned. Nevertheless, McMahon’s
closing words are elegiac, hinting that its loss might somehow diminish
us.

In his intriguing story not only is the age of genius dead; the seeds of
its destruction were sown very early on. The term “genius” in its modern
sense was first adopted in the eighteenth century and it involved a
conflation of two Latin terms: *genius*, which for the Romans was the
god of our conception, imbuing us with particular personality traits but
nevertheless a supernatural force external to us, and *ingenium*, a
related noun referring to our internal dispositions and talents, our
inborn nature. McMahon also details the associations that these ideas
had derived from the Greek world, particularly from speculation about
the Socratic *daimonion*, the Platonic idea that poetry is the product
of a “divine madness,” and the Aristotelian view that there are
fundamental differences between minds.

So why did the moderns need a term like this, in which natural
characteristics are fused with supernatural associations? McMahon’s
account is not, as we might expect, rooted in the inexplicability of
certain human achievements, the perceived inability to comprehend them
in purely natural terms. Rather, he suggests that two fundamental
transformations in human thought created the need for such a conception.
The first was the process of disenchantment through which God came to
seem increasingly remote from human life as belief in his intermediaries
among us—spirits, angels, prophets, apostles, and saints—was eroded.
McMahon hypothesizes that this created a sense of abandonment, a need
for “assurance that special beings still animated the universe.”

The second relevant transformation, he tells us, was the emergent
belief, from the seventeenth century on, in the natural equality of all
human beings, a belief that provoked as a powerful reaction an
insistence that we recognize naturally superior beings. The cult of the
genius arose as a response to this dual challenge, identifying a species
of being “who walked where the angels and god-men once trod.” In an age
in which both secularization and egalitarianism were advancing rapidly,
then, the notion of “genius” must have been imperiled from the start.

McMahon’s narrative is not driven by the mysteries of individual
geniuses. He waves his hand rather nonchalantly across their ranks:

> Geniuses translated, decoded, and deciphered the mysteries of the
> universe, even as they rendered the universe deeper, more complex, and
> more profound…. Wonders themselves, they made the world wondrous with
> their revelations and creations…. Geniuses reassured that the universe
> was still a magical place.

Their accomplishments are all subsumed in a story of reaction and
regression, of which we are called upon to disapprove.

And we are offered a good deal to disapprove of in the detailed and
colorful pages that follow: the transformation of the idea that genius
consists in a genius for something in particular, manifested in discrete
capacities, into the idea of genius as a “unitary constant,” a power
that can be applied to anything by its holder; the attribution of a
biological basis to this new type of being, “the genius”; the racist
exploitation of that myth in Europe and America; eugenics programs,
phrenology, and organology (pseudosciences that claimed to prove that
genius was the sole province of white males); dictators who exploited
the cult of genius to support authoritarian rule.

Some of McMahon’s strongest claims seem rather undersupported by the
evidence, for example that “the religion of genius was a precondition of
Hitler’s acceptance.” But it is with bold confidence that the narrative
draws us inexorably toward its dramatic conclusion, the burning down of
Valhalla. The war with the “evil genius” Hitler is ended by atom
bombs—an apocalyptic force unwittingly unleashed by the “good genius,”
Einstein. The good genius is also the last genius, since his
achievements, “however noble,” McMahon tells us, still served in the end
“to highlight…the impotence of the individual before ideologically
driven masses and the organized violence of states.”

After the war, McMahon writes, shaken nations were reluctant to credit
flawed human beings with the superhuman attributes of genius and wary of
“investing human idols with such power.” He claims that it is hard to
name someone genuinely held to be a genius in the postwar world who is
not a holdover from the pre-war period. Or at least, no single figure
can “command common and overwhelming assent.” If we still use the term
with profligacy for professors and pop stars and Hollywood actors, it is
only because it has become so emptied of meaning as to be trivial and
harmless, a breathless superlative employed in admiration of any degree
of talent.

And yet McMahon seems wistful. The idea of genius, he concedes, “long
kept alive an exhilarating sense of the possibilities of being—and being
transcendent—in the world.” But if there is a legitimate basis for this
regret it is difficult to detect it in McMahon’s debunking historical
account. There is more to be said about what these “possibilities of
being” consisted of and whether we should feel a sense of loss if they
are no longer alive.

Alexander Pope described the achievement of the great genius of the
Enlightenment in these famous lines:

> *Nature, and Nature’s laws lay hid in night:\
>  God said,*Let Newton be!*And all was light.\
> *

The vast darkness of the universe was at last illuminated by the human
intellect. Newton’s achievements were felt to have cosmic significance.

The genius, on this understanding, answers the human demand for what
Thomas Nagel has called the “yearning for cosmic reconciliation,” that
is, for a way of living in harmony (being connected “intelligibly and,
if possible, satisfyingly”) with the whole of reality. This is not a
demand that has to emanate from within a religious perspective, or one
that can only be met by a religious worldview. But nonreligious people
who feel this yearning will always be faced with the possibility of
absurdity.

Friedrich Nietzsche (who, by the way, had little interest in the concept
of genius) expresses this sense of the absurd in his own simple parable:

> In some remote corner of the universe, poured out and glittering in
> the innumerable solar systems, there was once a star on which clever
> animals invented knowledge. That was the haughtiest and most
> mendacious minute of “world history”—yet only a minute. After nature
> had drawn a few breaths the star grew cold, and the clever animals had
> to die.

This picture of cosmic insignificance is what the idea of genius has
repeatedly challenged. The genius has provided us with what we might
call a theodicy of the human mind—not the traditional theodicy that
tries to justify the ways of god to suffering humanity, but rather one
that permits us to see ourselves, in however attenuated a sense, as the
point of it all. If we no longer believe in genius in this sense,
perhaps that is the result not simply of a social or political shift but
rather an intellectual one, a deep change in the way we understand the
mind and its relation to the cosmos.

It was among the early Romantics that a secular conception of genius as
a theodicy of the mind first took hold. Newton was not, for the
Romantics, the prototypical genius, casting light into the darkest
corners of existence. The materialist, mechanistic worldview of
Newtonian science could not accommodate the most important features of
experience, the human mind and human freedom. In McMahon’s story the
part played by Romanticism is chiefly that of mystification (he even at
one point compares Romantic claims about the realm of Idea or Spirit
made by such writers as Schelling, Novalis, and Friedrich Schlegel to
the obscure and rambling metaphysics of the occultist Helena Blavatsky,
founder of the Theosophical Society). But in fact at the foundation of
much Romantic thought was an attempt at demystification, at clarifying
the relationship between mind and world. The transcendental idealist
tradition in philosophy, founded by Immanuel Kant, gave rise to a notion
of genius that unified the human mind and nature in a distinctive way.

In his *Critique of Pure Judgment* Kant had argued that Newtonian
physics could not explain how complex, self-organizing life forms such
as plants and animals could come into existence. Human artifacts with
complex mechanisms have an external cause, but plants and animals appear
to be self-organizing and self-maintaining. Kant suggested that the best
way to describe them was as if they were behaving with an inner
purposiveness. The “as if” is important: he did not believe we could
prove there was an implicit teleology at work in nature, only that it
was a necessary supposition once we tried to comprehend those aspects
that mechanistic ideas could not explain.

Kant saw the same kind of process in the work of the artist. Beauty in a
work of art consisted for him in the ability to stimulate a pleasurable
interaction between our understanding and our imagination, a state of
free play that could not be captured by any determinate concept. So the
creation of a work of beauty could not involve setting out from a
concept of what is to be produced and then following rules for its
production. A form of unconscious purposiveness had to be at work.
“Genius” was Kant’s description of this process: it was “the innate
mental aptitude (*ingenium*) *through which* nature gives the rule to
art.” Artistic genius connected us in a deep way with nature.

[![shaw\_2-100914.jpg](/media/photo/2014/09/17/shaw_2-100914_jpg_250x1450_q85.jpg)](/media/photo/2014/09/17/shaw_2-100914.jpg)
The Estate of Max Beerbohm

‘Dante in Oxford’; drawing by Max Beerbohm from *The Poets’ Corner*,
1904

The early Romantics seized on the idea of an organism as a means of
describing nature not as a machine but as a living force, dropping
Kant’s proviso that this is a merely regulative idea. Hölderlin,
Schelling, and the Schlegel brothers developed this Kantian conception
into an idea of the cosmos as a whole (though an idea that could be
properly comprehended not by reason but only by aesthetic intuition).
The mental and the physical were understood as manifestations of the
same underlying force generating the infinitely complex, self-organizing
structure that was the cosmos. Human creativity was continuous with this
self-organization but it had a special status as the point at which the
whole process achieved self-consciousness. As Schlegel put it, “Man is
nature’s creative backward glance upon itself.” And the genius, of
course, was at the apex of the entire hierarchy, the most sophisticated
and marvelous expression of the force that moves the cosmos.

The German Romantics were therefore committed to the idea that the true
genius combines self-conscious reflection with deep unconscious sources
of creativity. As Romantic ideas spread across Europe the claim that the
role of the unconscious in creation separated the original genius from
mere imitators quickly caught on. M.H. Abrams, in his classic study *The
Mirror and the Lamp*, wryly notes: “With the end of the eighteenth
century in England, even the more sober poets began to testify to an
experience of unwilled and unpremeditated verse.” If nature was working
through the mind of the genius, it could contain infinities.

The Kantian concern with the beautiful was eclipsed by his notion of the
sublime. This meant to the Romantics the sense that in confronting
natural phenomena so immense that our imagination cannot fully picture
them, we nevertheless feel the superiority of our own reason; the mind
can grasp infinities that our senses cannot show us. Beethoven was the
artist who, above all others, conjured this feeling of confronting
titanic forces and yet soaring above them, exalted.

If the idea of genius, then, served as a theodicy of the human mind,
what of the extraordinary individuals whose intellectual achievements
did not exalt us? Charles Darwin, who was responsible for one of the
greatest transformations in human self-understanding there has ever
been, brought us very much down to earth. And indeed he did not supply a
new archetype for genius; in fact there has always been controversy over
whether he deserves the title (he is barely mentioned in McMahon’s
book). He did not even consider himself a genius: “I have no great
quickness of apprehension or wit,” he said.

Darwin saw himself as rather a plodder and marveled that with his
“moderate abilities” he had nevertheless managed to influence scientific
thought to such an extent. Some of his most important breakthroughs were
made during eight years of work on barnacles and after all his
tremendous discoveries he spent his final years studying worms. An
understanding of our place in nature in purely materialist terms did not
seem to constitute an explosion of light in the universe.

Einstein, on the other hand, clearly supplanted Newton in the public
mind as the genius who had unraveled the darkest mysteries of the
cosmos, revealing that even space and time were not what we had supposed
but rather vastly more strange and mysterious. When the theory of
general relativity was confirmed by the 1919 eclipse, it was reported in
the press as one of the greatest achievements there had ever been in
human thought. And Einstein himself described in very Romantic terms the
marvelous arrangement of the universe, his faith in the “beauty and
sublimity” of the transcendent order that lay behind it all. He
expressed wonder that the world as we experience it is not a random
jumble of perceptions but is ordered in such a way that we can
comprehend it: “The eternal mystery of the world is its
comprehensibility…. The fact that it is comprehensible is a miracle.”

It would be an exaggeration to say that no physicist since Einstein has
been considered a genius, but what is true is that this faith in the
natural harmony of the human mind with a rationally accessible,
predictable external order suffered some severe blows from within
physics during Einstein’s lifetime. Niels Bohr and his colleagues
demonstrated that in a quantum system the location of a particle prior
to observation could only be described probabilistically, as a wave
function. But once that particle is observed or measured, the wave
function collapses, and the particle is found to have a determinate
location. In reality as we ordinarily know it, everything has a
determinate position rather than occupying an indeterminate
“superposition.” The Copenhagen interpretation of the quantum phenomenon
by Niels Bohr and his colleagues asserted that the act of observation
itself caused the wave function to collapse.

Bohr and Werner Heisenberg, with bitter opposition from Einstein,
assailed the assumption that the relationship between the mental and the
physical could be modeled as a mind comprehending an objectively
existing external reality. Nor did they replace this model with any view
that was either compatible with our commonsense understanding of
ourselves or reassuring about our place in the universe. And further
attempts to solve the measurement problem have generated even more
bewildering notions. Hugh Everett proposed that the wave function does
not in fact collapse but rather all its possibilities are realized;
although we perceive the particle at only one determinate location,
there are multiverses, of which we are unaware, in which every other
location is perceived. On this Many Worlds view, which hypothesizes
billions of parallel universes, our ordinary conceptions of mind and
world have become so remote that we can no longer have any sense of what
a theodicy of mind would look like.

But there is one field of human thought in which the highest idea of
genius still seems to some to make sense. That is mathematics. In the
popular imagination mathematical genius now seems to be the dominant
model and it is not hard to see why. Not only do mathematical
achievements require extraordinary intellectual abilities, unimaginable
to nonmathematicians, they also have certainty and permanence. The
fallible human mind participates in the beauty of an infallible abstract
realm that, in the view of many mathematicians, exists independently of
the mental and physical worlds. Kurt Gödel, Einstein’s friend and
colleague at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, took this
kind of mathematical Platonism to be a consequence of his First
Incompleteness Theorem. He proved that for any finitely specifiable,
consistent formal system of sufficient complexity to express arithmetic,
there will exist truths of arithmetic that are not provable within that
system. Gödel inferred from this that it was impossible to think of
mathematics as a human construction.

That position is philosophically controversial but it allows us to
imagine possibilities for a new theodicy of mind based on the
mathematical model. The phenomenon that Eugene Wigner, in his 1960
paper, called “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the
Natural Sciences” expands our sense of living in a universe designed
somehow to be intelligible to us. But for those who believe in this
possibility, it is an article of faith. The fact that laws of physics
can be expressed (revealed to us) through mathematical concepts, such as
complex numbers, which are not derived from any experience of the world,
is mysterious to us. And the fact that the human mind has evolved in
such a way that it can recognize these utterly unintuitive mathematical
truths is equally mysterious. We are very far indeed from developing a
coherent and persuasive theory of how the mental, the physical, and the
“third realm” of abstract objects, such as mathematical results, might
all be related, explaining the miracle of comprehensibility.

If we were to do so, elevating the human mind once more to the status of
being a central structuring principle in the cosmos, this would
constitute a form of idealism that goes against the prevailing
assumption among natural scientists and philosophers that any
explanation of the natural order must ultimately have a physical basis.
But unless physicalist naturalism succeeds in explaining how the cosmos
can contain conscious creatures for whom the universe is intelligible,
there will be those who hold out hope of an alternative. Thomas Nagel,
one of the few philosophers today holding onto such hope, implies that
we in fact have an ethical obligation to understand our deep relation to
the cosmos, because “in each of us, the universe has come to
consciousness.” As Schlegel said, we are nature looking back at itself.
But many more geniuses would be required for us to uncover what this
really means.

In the meantime, if the mathematical paradigm seems too abstract, too
remote from our lived experience, we have found an artistic genius to
make that abstract order resound with human emotion. Johann Sebastian
Bach is the musical genius of our age. Not the Bach of the Mass in B
Minor, though, or the *Saint Matthew Passion*. Undoubtedly we still
admire those tremendous choral works, but it is the instrumental works,
and the keyboard works in particular, that have been chosen to
communicate our secular theodicy of the mind. The formal qualities of
these works, the internal logic of counterpoint and harmony, are
dazzling. But at the same time they somehow express authentic human
emotions. Objective abstract order and subjective human experience are
mysteriously in harmony.

Glenn Gould drew attention to this aspect of Bach in the sleeve notes to
his first recording of the *Goldberg Variations* in 1956. The work ends
where it began, with the original sarabande. Gould tells us that “its
suggestion of perpetuity is indicative of the essential incorporeality”
of the work. He notes its “disdain of the organic relevance of the part
to the whole,” and yet “without analysis we have sensed that there
exists a fundamental coordinating intelligence.” What is achieved is a
“union of music and metaphysics” in the “realm of technical
transcendence.” And yet the aim of the work, he tells us, is “a
community of sentiment.” Profound and noble emotions are inscribed in
the work’s formal properties.

Douglas Hofstadter has gone as far as to suggest that some of Bach’s
formal devices, mirroring Gödelian self-reference, provide the key to
understanding how consciousness could have emerged from the physical
world. And Carl Sagan, when consulted about the music that should be
sent in the Voyager I space probe to regions where it might reach
extraterrestrial intelligence, responded:

> I would vote for Bach, all of Bach, streamed out into space over and
> over again. We would be bragging, of course, but it is surely
> excusable to put on the best possible face at the beginning of such an
> acquaintance. Any species capable of producing the music of Johann
> Sebastian Bach cannot be all bad.

Bach, it seems, has kept alive for a few the faith that genius might
vindicate the human mind from the perspective of the universe.

As the little Voyager I spacecraft began its long journey into
interstellar space, the probability that the tiny creatures left behind
on earth would obliterate themselves in a nuclear holocaust was not
vanishingly small. This outcome would have made even the *Goldbergs*
moot. The nuclear catastrophe was averted but our astonishing capacities
for imagination and invention have allowed us to discover new means of
total self-destruction. Sir Martin Rees has predicted that we have no
more than a fifty-fifty chance of getting through the next century
without a catastrophic event. We are relentlessly destroying the only
known life-supporting planet in our solar system. The human mind may yet
render itself absurd without any help from the cosmos.

So perhaps it is no wonder that for many individuals their theodicy has
shrunk to the proportions of the nursery, to an infant watching brightly
colored toys on a screen accompanied by Bach’s Cello Suite number 1,
arranged for xylophone and electric keyboard. Our “baby Einsteins,”
every one of their emerging minds a miracle, justify to their parents
all of conscious human existence. We must hope they can find new
“possibilities of being” for themselves.

-   [Email](/mail_friend/5/26066/)
-   [Print](?pagination=false&printpage=true)
-   

-   [Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)
-   

### Related

[![image](/media/photo/2014/01/29/stauffer_1-022014_jpg_300x200_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/feb/20/why-bach-moves-us/?insrc=rel)

#### [Why Bach Moves Us](/articles/archives/2014/feb/20/why-bach-moves-us/?insrc=rel)

[George B.
Stauffer](/articles/archives/2014/feb/20/why-bach-moves-us/?insrc=rel)

[![image](/media/photo/2013/07/17/dyson_1-081513_jpg_300x200_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2013/aug/15/oppenheimer-shape-genius/?insrc=rel)

#### [Oppenheimer: The Shape of Genius](/articles/archives/2013/aug/15/oppenheimer-shape-genius/?insrc=rel) **

[Freeman
Dyson](/articles/archives/2013/aug/15/oppenheimer-shape-genius/?insrc=rel)

[![image](/media/photo/2013/05/01/holt_1-052313_jpg_300x200_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2013/may/23/mandlebrot-mathematics-of-roughness/?insrc=rel)

#### [Mandelbrot’s Genius](/articles/archives/2013/may/23/mandlebrot-mathematics-of-roughness/?insrc=rel) **

[Jim
Holt](/articles/archives/2013/may/23/mandlebrot-mathematics-of-roughness/?insrc=rel)

![The 50 Year Argument on
HBO](/media/advertising/NYR-50YearArgument.png "The 50 Year Argument on HBO")

[![October 9,
2014](/media/photo/2014/09/17/nyrb100914.png)](/issues/2014/oct/09/?insrc=wai)

#### Also in This Issue

—— October 9, 2014 ——

[![Israel & the US: The Delusions of Our
Diplomacy](/media/img/illustrations/kerry_John-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/israel-us-delusions-our-diplomacy/?insrc=wai)

##### [Why the US Gets Israel Wrong](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/israel-us-delusions-our-diplomacy/?insrc=wai)

[Nathan Thrall](/contributors/nathan-thrall-3/)

[![The Pillars of Arab
Despotism](/media/photo/2014/09/12/worth_1-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/pillars-arab-despotism/?insrc=wai)

##### [The Pillars of Arab Despotism](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/pillars-arab-despotism/?insrc=wai)

[Robert F. Worth](/contributors/robert-f-worth/)

[![The Cut of
Coco](/media/photo/2014/09/17/muhlstein_1-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/cut-coco-chanel/?insrc=wai)

##### [The Cut of Coco](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/cut-coco-chanel/?insrc=wai)

[Anka Muhlstein](/contributors/anka-muhlstein/)

[![How Stoical Was
Seneca?](/media/photo/2014/09/17/beard_1-100914_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/how-stoical-was-seneca/?insrc=wai)

##### [How Stoical Was Seneca?](/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/how-stoical-was-seneca/?insrc=wai) **

[Mary Beard](/contributors/beard-mary/)

[More **](/issues/2014/oct/09/?insrc=wai)

[![Subscribe to the New York
Review](/media/advertising/Subscribe2014-300x250.png "Subscribe to the New York Review")](/subscriptions/order/)

### —— New Posts ——

#### [NYRblog](/blogs/nyrblog/)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/puppetmaster-2_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/19/taiwan-master-timekeeper-hou-hsiao-hsien/?insrc=wbll)

##### [Taiwan’s Master Timekeeper](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/19/taiwan-master-timekeeper-hou-hsiao-hsien/?insrc=wbll)

[J.
Hoberman](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/19/taiwan-master-timekeeper-hou-hsiao-hsien/?insrc=wbll)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/SOLZHENITSYN_Alex_png_63x63_crop_q85.png)](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/17/what-is-censorship/?insrc=wbll)

##### [The Soul of the Censor](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/17/what-is-censorship/?insrc=wbll)

[Robert
Darnton](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/17/what-is-censorship/?insrc=wbll)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/Dean_Inflation_jpg_63x63_crop_q85.jpg)](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/16/inflation-hawks-wrong/?insrc=wbll)

##### [Stuck on Inflation](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/16/inflation-hawks-wrong/?insrc=wbll)

[Jeff
Madrick](/blogs/nyrblog/2014/sep/16/inflation-hawks-wrong/?insrc=wblu)

#### [The Gallery](/blogs/gallery/)

[![image](/media/img/blogimages/Judah-Ukraine-Blog_Version_png_63x63_crop_q85.png)](/blogs/gallery/2014/sep/16/war-eastern-ukraine-photographs/?insrc=wbll)

##### [Scenes from Eastern Ukraine](/blogs/gallery/2014/sep/16/war-eastern-ukraine-photographs/?insrc=wbll)

[Tim
Judah](/blogs/gallery/2014/sep/16/war-eastern-ukraine-photographs/?insrc=wbll)

### Free Newsletter

News of upcoming issues, contributors, special events, online features,
and more.

-   [Home](/)
-   [Contact Us](/contact/)
-   [About](/about/)
-   [Subscribe](/subscriptions/order/)
-   [Advertise](/advertising/)
-   [University Press
    Listing](/upress/ "New Titles from University Presses")
-   [Independent Press Listing](/ipl/ "Independent Press Listing")
-   [Help/FAQ](/about/faq/ "Frequently Asked Questions")
-   [Books](/books/)
-   [Terms of Service](/about/terms-of-service/)
-   [Feeds](/rss/)
-   [Newsletters](/newsletter/magazine/)

© 1963-2014 NYREV, Inc. All rights reserved.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2014/oct/09/wonder-boys-genius/
