The Code Experience
===================

-   [Home](/)
-   [About Me](http://www.code-experience.com/the-code-experience/)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/Retolements)
-   [GitHub](https://github.com/retozi)

Â© 2014. All rights reserved.

Why you might not need MVC with React.js
========================================

2014-04-29

I've compared React to tradional MVC in
[this](http://www.code-experience.com/react-js-vs-traditional-mvc-backbone-ember-angular/)
blogpost.

I covered one important point: *re-rendering everything is nice*. But I
also claimed all kinds of other things (like not needing MVC patterns),
but didn't actually reason about them. This caused me to write this
follow up.

Let me throw out a disclaimer:

I will question the usefulness of MVC (MVC as in todays MV\*
implementations in JS frontend frameworks), the most established design
pattern in frontend development. Let me make it clear that it is not my
intention to invalidate MVC in general. Rather, I think it's importance
as a design pattern for very interactive web applications is overstated.

This post here is ballsy, since MVC is baked into the heads of frontend
people. It's ubiquitous. It's the biggest consensus amongst devs I've
ever seen, and MVC is widely considered "best practice". Basically,
people don't question MVC anymore. However, I personally think the
concept doesn't apply optimally to complex web apps (I might be wrong
though).

When does simple MVC go sideways?
---------------------------------

For the sake of the argument, let's consider the base of todays MVC
landscape, Backbone.js, and establish when things get tough:

#### Stage 1: Unproblematic

Let's assume you want to display a large list of data items in your app.
This is easy to do with backbone. You can even use the Backbone Router
to make a lot of such lists available, so this use case scales well.
This is where Backbone shines.

#### Stage 2: Still managable

Let's say you want to make your app a little more interactive. You add
some visibility toggles for certain DOM elements on the view that
displays your data items or maybe you'd like to add a simple filter for
the data items. Depending on the exact scenario, this ranges between
easy and still manageable.

#### Stage 3: Danger zone

You want to implement multiple additive filters for your list, and
additionally make this list explorable for the user by letting him
choose how the list is grouped and sorted. You will find yourself
wanting to make things like nested views, and you will implement change
listeners all over the place to re-render specific views. It's just a
matter of quantity until everything blows up in your face.

### The troublemaker

The thing that makes this stuff hard is **state**. This is not
surprising, state is your enemy in almost every programming problem. MVC
helps you to manage state. But only a specific type of state, namely
*data state*. Loading data from the server and visualize it in a view is
easy with Backbone. You can display as much data as you want without
creating a mess.

Let's contrast this with a type of state that I call *application
state*: The application state defines *what data is displayed in what
way at the moment*. Backbone driven solutions usually turn sour because
a Backbone app can only handle so much application state until things
become messy. In other words: The more interactivity, the harder it
gets. The optimal case is when application state is only represented by
the URL (stage 1). As soon as there is interaction between different
views (stage 3), things will get harder by the minute.

Other MVC frameworks offer solutions for these problems. However
something bugs me about this:

The solutions to these problems have nothing to do with MVC as a design
pattern. You can detach the model from the view all you want, you can
call your controlling abstraction thingy whatever you want (controller,
presenter, "whatever"), the problems won't go away until you introduce
new concepts to keep order.

The missing thing in MVC
------------------------

Here is what MVC doesn't cover: It does not define how communication
flows. If your application is very stateful in terms of application
state (read: interactive), the user can trigger changes to state all
over the place. To not go insane, there needs to be a defined flow of
how the information about state changes travels between components, so
we can orient ourselves everywhere in the app.

For example: If you click a button to hide a div, it needs to be defined
on what path the state change travels to the object that actually hides
the div, irrespective of where the button is.

Think of an electrical grid or closer to our domain, a network. There is
a defined, ordered flow in these types of system. Not every computer
attached to the internet has a direct connection to every other
computer, they are connected indirectly through nodes. Only this way
they become understandable and therefore manageable.

With Backbone, you have the global event system, and you are very
tempted to pull wires all over the place. This is fine if you have just
a few wires, but boy are you in trouble if you have many. The
responsible dev invents a specific flow that provides structure, but
there is always the possibility that after a big change, it doesn't work
out anymore, which results in a rewrite of the whole system.

You see, with a naive MVC pattern, information flow within a view is
easy, since it's a single, flat object. But between views, the
information flow is unmodeled and therefore hard.

You might argue that this is the job of the controller. However, in a
complex app, these controlling duties can not be done with a single
controller object. You need a control system and a control system is
defined by many nodes and an ordered communication flow between them.

information flow architecture: The obvious choice
-------------------------------------------------

The bigger MVC frameworks do a lot of work to orchestrate this data
flow. But why reinvent the wheel? There is already a blueprint for a
data flow layout available for free: The DOM.

Events already use it. They bubble up and down through nodes. The so
called *Cascading* Style Sheets use it as well.

The DOM has a tree structure that defines relationships between display
elements. Accidentally, communication systems are usually also modeled
like a tree.

So why not use the DOM hierarchy as the layout for the communication
architecture? It aligns perfectly with the DOM event system. It aligns
with the way CSS works.

This is exactly what React.js does. You define components and put them
into parent-children relationships to describe the DOM. Additionally the
parents pass down the necessary state to the children, and if needed,
the channel to change the state. This automatically builds communication
channels in a tree structure that naturally represents the reasoning of
your app.

I cannot overstate how awesome this idea is. It took me a short time to
get it and as soon as I got it, I felt like there is no problem that
cannot be modeled decently with this system. Even better, it is equal to
how DOM events work. It becomes very natural to pick up a DOM event and
transform it into state. The best part: It scales almost indefinitely!

To use an analogy, instead of having a limp puppet that is controlled
via strings by the puppet master (a controller controlling a view in
MVC), you make communication channels that endogenously go through the
whole system, like nerve fibers in the human body. There is always a
clear structure on how information travels: Along the limbs through
nerve fibers from and to the root node, the brain.

Using the DOM as a communication layout means that if your DOM tree is
well-structured, your communication system is also well-structured! I
bet a lot of apps have a well-structured DOM right now, but a bad
communication layout.

Communication along the DOM nodes is at the absolute center of React.
The fun thing is that once communication between components is fully
taken care of, there is not much else to solve (usually). So most of the
time, there is no need for an MVC pattern anymore because all the
controller and most of the views responsibilities have to do with
communication of state anyways, and they are already taken care of.

How to model state
------------------

Communication is one part of managing state. But there is more to it.
State needs to be explicit, and React does this rigorously. With todays
MVC frameworks, there is a natural tendency to store application state
implicitly in the DOM, and everything that is implicit tends to be
forgotten and duplicated if needed in more than one place. This is bad.

Additionally, state is easier to reason about if its implementation is
hidden. It should not matter if state is implemented with a model or via
the URL. Everybody that once tried to move state from the route to
somewhere else in a Backbone driven app knows how much work this can be
because the implementation of state is not hidden.

easy != simple
--------------

There are probably people that will argue that there is framework X that
provides solutions for all of these problems just as well. Agreed, they
do. But there is one big difference: You need to learn a lot more stuff
to use them.

An experienced Ember.js dev that knows Ember in and out will say that he
finds it easy to manage application state in Ember. I cannot disagree
since easiness is subjective, but what were the costs to achieve this
easiness? Almost all sources mention the steep learning curve of the
bigger MVC frameworks. You need to know a lot of stuff and spend a lot
of time to learn all their concepts.

In contrast, everything you need to read to "get" React conceptually is
[this](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/thinking-in-react.html).
It's one small example. React is an extremely simple concept because it
just describes the DOM with components, and components communicate along
the DOM structure.

I believe that simplicity should be the ultimate goal in a software
solution. Simple concepts become easy quicker than complex ones. If you
have a concept that is twice as simple as another one, but solves the
problem with the same ease, then why choose the complex one?

Conclusion
----------

If you have a lot of data to display, but not that much other state in
your application, then MVC is a great concept to organize your app. When
you have a lot of interaction and therefore a lot of application state,
the problems that come with that state dominate the problems MVC solves.

Communication between components about changed state cause the biggest
headaches, and because React centers around the solution to that
problem, writing stateful apps is much simpler in React. You can see
this in the fact that the "Hello World" or the TodoMVC examples don't
look that nice in React, but a complex, interactive app looks awesome.

In a React app, MVC patterns are not in the center of attention anymore,
and might not even be present at all.

I only realized clearly what it is that makes interactive apps hard
after React provided me with the solution. I can only urge you to try
and embrace it the next time you write something interactive. You will
learn a lot about frontend development.

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

![image](/view.gif?page=/why-you-might-not-need-mvc-with-reactjs/)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.code-experience.com/why-you-might-not-need-mvc-with-reactjs/
