-   [Jump to main content](#content)
-   [Jump to navigation](#journalnav)
-   [nature.com homepage](/)
-   [Publications A-Z index](/siteindex/)
-   [Browse by subject](/browse/)

-   [My account](/myaccount/)
-   [Submit manuscript](http://mts-mp.nature.com "Submit  manuscript")
-   [Register](/register/ "Register with Nature.com")
-   [Subscribe](/mp/subscribe.html "Subscribe to Molecular Psychiatry")

[![Advertisement](http://ad.doubleclick.net/N285/ad/mp.nature.com/;abr=!NN2;type=exprv;artid=mp2014105a;pos=top;subjmeta=631;subjmeta=208;subjmeta=477;techmeta=45;techmeta=43;sz=728x90;tile=1;ord=123456789?)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/N285/jump/mp.nature.com/;abr=!NN2;type=exprv;artid=mp2014105a;pos=top;subjmeta=631;subjmeta=208;subjmeta=477;techmeta=45;techmeta=43;sz=728x90;tile=1;ord=123456789?)

[Login](/foxtrot/svc/login "login to Nature.com")[Cart](/ecommerce/cart/list.action)

[![Molecular Psychiatry
homepage](/mp/images/journal_header_v3.jpg)](/mp/ "Molecular Psychiatry homepage")

Search [Advanced
search](/search/adv_search?sp-a=sp1001702d&sp-x-1=ujournal&sp-q-1=mp)

[Journal home](/mp/index.html) \> [Advance online
publication](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/index.html) \> [16 September
2014](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/index.html#16092014) \> Full text

Expert Review
=============

*Molecular Psychiatry* advance online publication 16 September 2014;
doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.105

Genetics and intelligence differences: five special findings\
Open
-------------------------------------------------------------

R Plomin^[1](#aff1 "affiliated with 1")^ and I J
Deary^[2](#aff2 "affiliated with 2"),[3](#aff3 "affiliated with 3")^

1.  ^1^King's College London, MRC Social, Genetic & Developmental
    Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, DeCrespigny Park,
    London, UK
2.  ^2^Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
3.  ^3^Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology,
    University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

Correspondence: Professor R Plomin, King's College London, MRC Social,
Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, PO80, Institute of
Psychiatry, DeCrespigny Park, Denmark Hill, London SE5 8AF, UK. E-mail:
[robert.plomin@kcl.ac.uk](mailto:robert.plomin@kcl.ac.uk)

Received 14 March 2014; Revised 18 July 2014; Accepted 22 July 2014\
Advance online publication 16 September 2014

[Top of page](#top)

### Abstract

Intelligence is a core construct in differential psychology and
behavioural genetics, and should be so in cognitive neuroscience. It is
one of the best predictors of important life outcomes such as education,
occupation, mental and physical health and illness, and mortality.
Intelligence is one of the most heritable behavioural traits. Here, we
highlight five genetic findings that are special to intelligence
differences and that have important implications for its genetic
architecture and for gene-hunting expeditions. (i) The heritability of
intelligence increases from about 20% in infancy to perhaps 80% in later
adulthood. (ii) Intelligence captures genetic effects on diverse
cognitive and learning abilities, which correlate phenotypically about
0.30 on average but correlate genetically about 0.60 or higher. (iii)
Assortative mating is greater for intelligence (spouse correlations
\~0.40) than for other behavioural traits such as personality and
psychopathology (\~0.10) or physical traits such as height and weight
(\~0.20). Assortative mating pumps additive genetic variance into the
population every generation, contributing to the high narrow
heritability (additive genetic variance) of intelligence. (iv) Unlike
psychiatric disorders, intelligence is normally distributed with a
positive end of exceptional performance that is a model for ‘positive
genetics’. (v) Intelligence is associated with education and social
class and broadens the causal perspectives on how these three
inter-correlated variables contribute to social mobility, and health,
illness and mortality differences. These five findings arose primarily
from twin studies. They are being confirmed by the first new
quantitative genetic technique in a century—Genome-wide Complex Trait
Analysis (GCTA)—which estimates genetic influence using genome-wide
genotypes in large samples of unrelated individuals. Comparing GCTA
results to the results of twin studies reveals important insights into
the genetic architecture of intelligence that are relevant to attempts
to narrow the ‘missing heritability’ gap.

[Top of page](#top)

### Introduction

Nearly a century ago, intelligence was the first behavioural trait
studied using newly emerging quantitative genetic designs such as twin
and adoption
studies.^[1](#bib1),\\ [2](#bib2),\\ [3](#bib3),\\ [4](#bib4)^ Such
studies have consistently shown that genetic influence on individual
differences in intelligence is substantial.^[5](#bib5),[6](#bib6)^
Intelligence has become the target of molecular genetic studies
attempting to identify genes responsible for its heritability.

Here, we refrain from providing another general overview of the genetics
of intelligence. We begin by noting three regularities that might almost
be dubbed ‘laws’ from genetic research that apply to many traits in the
life sciences. The bulk of our review highlights genetic findings that
are specific to intelligence rather than these general laws.

[Top of page](#top)

### Three ‘laws’ of the genetics of complex traits (including intelligence)

#### All traits show significant genetic influence

Finding that differences between individuals (traits, whether assessed
quantitatively as a dimension or qualitatively as a diagnosis) are
significantly heritable is so ubiquitous for behavioural traits that it
has been enshrined as the first law of behavioural genetics.^[7](#bib7)^
Although the pervasiveness of this finding makes it a commonplace
observation, it should not be taken for granted, especially in the
behavioural sciences, because this was the battleground for
nature-nurture wars until only a few decades ago in
psychiatry,^[8](#bib8)^ even fewer decades ago in
psychology,^[9](#bib9)^ and continuing today in some areas such as
education.^[10](#bib10),[11](#bib11)^ It might be argued that it is no
longer surprising to demonstrate genetic influence on a behavioural
trait, and that it would be more interesting to find a trait that shows
*no* genetic influence.

#### No traits are 100% heritable

For some areas of behavioural research—especially in psychiatry—the
pendulum has swung so far from a focus on nurture to a focus on nature
that it is important to highlight a second law of genetics for complex
traits and common disorders: All traits show substantial environmental
influence, in that heritability is not 100% for any trait. Acceptance of
the importance of both genetic and environmental influences leads to
interest in the interplay between genes and environment, such as their
interaction (moderation) and correlation (mediation) in the development
of complex traits, Plomin *et al.*[^6^](#bib6) pp 105–127.

#### Heritability is caused by many genes of small effect

The first two laws come from quantitative genetic research, which uses,
for example, the twin method to assess the net contribution of genetics
to individual differences without knowledge of the genetic architecture
of a trait, such as the number of genes involved or their effect sizes.
A third law has emerged from molecular genetic research that attempts to
identify specific genes responsible for widespread heritability,
especially genome-wide association (GWA) studies of the past few years:
The heritability of traits is caused by many genes of small
effect.^[12](#bib12)^ This was the premise of quantitative genetic
theory set out nearly a century ago,^[13](#bib13)^ but quantitative
genetic methods themselves could not shine much light on the
distribution of the effect sizes of genes in the population. For
decades, the failure of linkage analyses to identify replicable linkages
to chromosomal regions could be interpreted as support for this
hypothesis because linkage has little power to detect small effect
sizes. However, GWA studies have made it clear that the largest effect
sizes of associations are very small indeed. For example, we are aware
of almost no replicated genetic associations that account for more than
1 per cent of the population variance of quantitative traits such as
height and weight. Because GWA studies have adequate power to detect
such effect sizes, we can conclude that there are no larger effect
sizes, at least for the common single-nucleotide variants that have been
used in such studies to date. If the largest effect sizes are so small,
the smallest effect sizes must be infinitesimal, which means that such
associations will be difficult to detect and even more difficult to
replicate. For example, the largest GWA study of intelligence
differences, which included nearly 18 000 children, found no genome-wide
significant associations. The largest effect sizes accounted for 0.2% of
the variance of intelligence scores.^[14](#bib14)^ Another recent GWA
study of a sample of 1500 children reported an association that
accounted for 0.5% of the variance of intelligence scores,^[15](#bib15)^
but this association showed no effect in the study of 18 000 children
(*P*=0.73; Benyamin B, personal communication). A GWA of educational
attainment—which correlates moderately with intelligence—included more
than 125 000 individuals; the DNA variant with the largest effect size
accounted for 1% of the variance in years of education but the variance
explained was only 0.02% in a replication sample.^[16](#bib16)^ ‘Missing
heritability’ is the catch-phrase to describe the great gulf between
heritability and the variance explained by associations with specific
DNA variants.

Rather than reviewing evidence for these general laws in relation to
intelligence, our review focuses on five findings from genetic research
that are specific to intelligence. Because of the controversy and
confusion that continues to surround intelligence, especially in the
media and the general science literature,^[11](#bib11)^ we begin by
briefly discussing the definition, measurement and importance of
intelligence.

[Top of page](#top)

### What is intelligence and why is it important?

Although there are many types of cognitive ability tests of individual
differences, they almost all correlate substantially and positively;
people with higher ability on one cognitive task tend to have higher
ability on all of the others. Intelligence (more precisely, *general
cognitive ability* or *g,* as discovered and defined by Spearman in
1904^[17](#bib17)^) indexes this covariance, which accounts for about 40
per cent of the total variance when a battery of diverse cognitive tests
is administered to a sample with a good range of cognitive
ability.^[18](#bib18),[19](#bib19)^ As long as a battery of cognitive
tests is diverse and reliable, a general ‘factor’ (often represented by
the first unrotated principal component, which is not strictly a factor,
but that is the terminology that is often used) indexing intelligence
differences will emerge and correlate highly with such factors derived
from other batteries using wholly different cognitive
tests.^[20](#bib20)^ The general intelligence component (factor) is a
universally found statistical regularity, which means that some have
tried to provide an epithet for what it might capture. According to one
view, the core of this general intelligence factor is ‘the ability to
reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly, comprehend complex
ideas, learn quickly, and learn from experience’ (Gottfredson *et
al.*[^21^](#bib21) p.13; see also Deary^[22](#bib22)^). Intelligence is
at the pinnacle of the hierarchical model of cognitive abilities that
includes a middle level of group factors, such as the cognitive domains
of verbal and spatial abilities and memory, and a third level of
specific tests and their associated narrow cognitive
skills.^[18](#bib18),[23](#bib23)^

Intelligence is important scientifically and socially. Because
intelligence represents individual differences in brain processes
working in concert to solve problems, it is central to systems
approaches to brain structure and
function,^[24](#bib24),\\ [25](#bib25),\\ [26](#bib26)^ and to the
conceptualisation of how diverse cognitive abilities decline with
age.^[27](#bib27)^ It is also one of the most stable behavioural traits,
yielding a correlation of 0.63 in a study of people tested at age 11 and
then again at age 79.^[28](#bib28)^ Socially, intelligence is one of the
best predictors of key outcomes such as education and occupational
status.^[29](#bib29)^ People with higher intelligence tend to have
better mental and physical health and fewer illnesses throughout the
life course, and longer lives.^[22](#bib22),[30](#bib30)^

The rest of this review describes five genetic findings that are special
to intelligence differences: dramatic increases in heritability during
the life course, high genetic correlations among diverse cognitive
abilities, high assortative mating, the positive genetics of high
intelligence and the impact of intelligence on ‘social epidemiology’.
Most of these findings are not new,^[31](#bib31)^ but highlighting these
findings as special for intelligence is novel. Moreover, support for
these findings has increased in recent years from traditional
quantitative genetic research using the twin design that compares
identical and fraternal twins, and, importantly, from a new quantitative
genetic method that uses DNA alone to estimate overall genetic influence
in large samples of unrelated individuals. This method, which we will
refer to as Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis
(GCTA),^[32](#bib32),\\ [33](#bib33),\\ [34](#bib34),\\ [35](#bib35)^ is
the first new human quantitative genetic method in a century, and is
described in [Box 1](#box1).

##### [The first new quantitative genetic method in a century: Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis (GCTA).](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105b1.html#figure-title)

[![The first new quantitative genetic method in a century: Genome-wide
Complex Trait Analysis (GCTA) - Unfortunately we are unable to provide
accessible alternative text for this. If you require assistance to
access this image, please contact help@nature.com or the
author](/common/images/box_thumb.gif)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105b1.html#figure-title)[Full
box](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105b1.html#figure-title)

\

#### Heritability increases dramatically from infancy through adulthood despite genetic stability

It would be reasonable to assume that as we go through life,
experiences—Shakespeare’s ‘whips and scorns of time’—have a cumulative
effect on intelligence, perhaps overwhelming early genetic
predispositions. However, for intelligence, heritability increases
linearly, from (approximately) 20% in infancy to 40% in adolescence, and
to 60% in adulthood. Some evidence suggests that heritability might
increase to as much as 80% in later adulthood^[47](#bib47)^ but then
decline to about 60% after age 80.^[48](#bib48)^

Most genetic research has been consistent with this dramatic increase in
heritability for intelligence in the early human life course. [Figure
1](#fig1) shows the results of the first study to demonstrate
significant increases in heritability in cross-sectional analyses of 11
000 twin pairs from childhood (\~40%) to adolescence (\~50%) to young
adulthood (\~60%).^[49](#bib49)^ The non-overlapping standard errors
across the three ages indicate that the increases in heritabilities are
significant. Although these findings have been criticised because they
rely on cross-sectional comparisons (Mackintosh^[50](#bib50)^ p. 278),
similar results showing increases in heritability have been found in
longitudinal adoption studies^[51](#bib51),[52](#bib52)^ as well as in
longitudinal twin studies from early to middle
childhood^[53](#bib53),[54](#bib54)^ and from middle childhood to
adolescence.^[55](#bib55)^ Although GCTA can be used to test this
finding of increasing heritability across development, the first two
attempts to do so using longitudinal data did not have sufficient power
to detect the hypothesised age differences in GCTA heritability. One
study reported an increase in GCTA heritability of intelligence from
0.26 (0.17 standard error) at age 7 to 0.45 (0.14) at age
12.^[56](#bib56)^ Another study reported a decrease in GCTA heritability
from 0.48 (0.18) at age 11 to 0.28 (0.18) in old age.^[46](#bib46)^
Given the differences in the ages tested in these latter two studies,
they are not directly comparable. As indicated by the large standard
errors, larger longitudinal studies are needed.

##### [Figure 1.](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105f1.html#figure-title)

[![Figure 1 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible
alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this
image, please contact help@nature.com or the
author](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/thumbs/mp2014105f1th.jpg)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105f1.html#figure-title)

A meta-analysis of 11000 pairs of twins shows that the heritability of
intelligence increases significantly from childhood (age 9) to
adolescence (age 12) and to young adulthood (age 17). (Adapted from
Haworth *et al.*^[49](#bib49)^).

[Full figure and legend
(30K)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105f1.html#figure-title)[Download
Power Point slide (152
KB)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/slides/mp2014105-pf1.ppt)

\

Why does the heritability of intelligence increase so dramatically from
childhood to adulthood, as seen in twin studies? A clear yet apparently
contradictory finding constrains possible answers to this question.
Despite this great increase in heritability, the same genes affect
intelligence from age to age. For example, a recent twin study reported
a genetic correlation of 0.75 (standard error=0.08) from age 7 to age
12, despite increasing heritability from 0.36 (0.03) to 0.49 (0.04) and
despite mean changes in brain structure and function from childhood to
adolescence.^[55](#bib55)^ GCTA analyses in the same study but using
unrelated individuals yielded a highly similar genetic correlation of
0.73 (0.29) from age 7 to age 12. Most strikingly, a 60-year
longitudinal study of intelligence, which was the first application of
bivariate GCTA, yielded a genetic correlation of 0.62 (0.22) from age 11
to 69.^[46](#bib46)^

Thus, the question becomes, why does the heritability of intelligence
increase during development despite strong genetic stability from age to
age? That is, the same genes largely affect intelligence across the life
course and yet genes account for more variance as time goes by.
Increasing heritability despite genetic stability implies some
contribution from what has been called *genetic
amplification.*^[57](#bib57)^ This has recently been supported in a
meta-analysis of 11500 twin and sibling pairs with longitudinal data on
intelligence that found that a genetic amplification model fit the data
better than a model in which new genetic influences arise with
time.^[58](#bib58)^ Genotype-environment correlation seems the most
likely explanation in which small genetic differences are magnified as
children select, modify and create environments correlated with their
genetic propensities. This active model of selected environments—in
contrast to the traditional model of imposed environments—offers a
general paradigm for thinking about how genotypes become
phenotypes.^[59](#bib59)^

#### Intelligence indexes general genetic effects across diverse cognitive and learning abilities

Another special genetic feature of intelligence is that its differences
are caused by genes that affect cognitive abilities as diverse as, for
example, spatial ability, vocabulary, processing speed, executive
function and memory. Most of the genetic action lies with these general
(highly pleiotropic) effects, captured by intelligence, rather than
effects specific to each ability, leading to a Generalist Genes
Hypothesis.^[60](#bib60)^ This is a surprising finding because very
different neurocognitive processes appear to be involved in such
cognitive abilities.^[25](#bib25)^ Although these genetic correlations
put intelligence at the pinnacle of the hierarchical model of cognitive
abilities mentioned earlier, there is also genetic specificity that
builds the genetic architecture for the rest of the hierarchical
structure of group factors and specific tests.

In a meta-analysis of 322 studies, the average correlation among
individual diverse cognitive tests is about 0.3.^[18](#bib18)^ Genetic
correlations among cognitive tests are typically greater than 0.6,
indicating that the same genes are responsible for the heritabilities of
these tests.^[60](#bib60),[61](#bib61)^ Genetic correlations estimate
the extent to which genetic effects on one trait are correlated with
genetic effects on another trait independently of the heritabilities of
the two traits. They can be thought about roughly as the probability
that genes associated with one trait are also associated with the other
trait. Genetic correlations are derived from the genetic analysis of
covariance between traits using the same quantitative genetic methods
used to analyse variance.^[6](#bib6)^

These general genetic effects permeate not only cognitive abilities such
as spatial and vocabulary that are used as part of the assessment of
intelligence but also extend to education-related learning abilities
such as reading and arithmetic. [Figure 2](#fig2) shows the results of a
multivariate genetic analysis of 14 tests that comprise four distinct
test batteries—intelligence, reading, mathematics and language—for more
than 5000 pairs of 12-year-old twins.^[62](#bib62)^ The genetic
correlations (and 95% confidence intervals) between intelligence and
learning abilities are uniformly high: 0.88 (0.84–0.92) with reading,
0.86 (0.81–0.90) with mathematics and 0.91 with language (0.87–0.94).
Weighting these genetic correlations by the heritabilities of the latent
factors, it can be shown that about two-thirds of the phenotypic
correlations between the factors can be explained genetically. One
advantage of using such latent factors is that they exclude uncorrelated
measurement error. As a result, these genetic correlations are higher
than those found when uncorrected composite scores rather than latent
factors are analysed: 0.66 (0.05 standard error) for reading, 0.73
(0.03) for mathematics and 0.80 (0.06) for language.^[63](#bib63)^

##### [Figure 2.](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105f2.html#figure-title)

[![Figure 2 - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible
alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this
image, please contact help@nature.com or the
author](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/thumbs/mp2014105f2th.jpg)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105f2.html#figure-title)

Multivariate (common pathway) genetic analysis in which each latent
variable is indexed by three or four tests and the twin method is used
to estimate additive genetic (A), shared (common) environmental (C) and
nonshared environmental (E) contributions to the variance and covariance
among the latent variables. Squares represent measured traits; circles
represent latent factors. The lower tier of arrows represents factor
loadings; the second tier represents genetic and environmental path
coefficients. The curved arrows at the top represent correlations
between genetic and environmental latent factors, although only the
genetic correlations are shown here. (From Davis *et
al.*^[62](#bib62)^).

[Full figure and legend
(161K)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105f2.html#figure-title)[Download
Power Point slide (334
KB)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/slides/mp2014105-pf2.ppt)

\

The first attempts to use bivariate GCTA (see [Box 1](#box1)) to verify
these twin findings support the hypothesis of general genetic effects on
broad cognitive and learning ability-related differences. The GCTA
estimates of genetic correlation (and standard error) between
intelligence and learning abilities are highly similar to the twin study
estimates just mentioned for composite scores uncorrected for error:
0.89 (0.26) for reading, 0.74 (0.15) for mathematics and 0.81 (0.15) for
language, estimated from unrelated individuals from the same
sample.^[63](#bib63)^ Within intelligence, the major group factors of
verbal and nonverbal ability yielded a genetic correlation of 1.0 (0.32)
in a bivariate GCTA in the same sample.^[64](#bib64)^ The high GCTA
genetic correlation between verbal and nonverbal based on unrelated
individuals supported the twin study estimate of 0.60 (0.09) in the same
study.

An important feature of bivariate GCTA is that it yields genetic
correlations similar to genetic correlations estimated from the twin
method, even though heritabilities are considerably lower for GCTA than
for twin estimates. In the study just mentioned, GCTA heritabilities
were consistently lower than twin heritabilities: 0.35 vs 0.47 for
intelligence, 0.16 vs 0.59 for reading, 0.32 vs 0.48 for mathematics and
0.35 vs 0.41 for language. As noted in [Box 1](#box1), GCTA heritability
estimates are limited to the additive effects tagged by the common
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) used on DNA arrays (i.e., the
direct effects of the SNPs on the array and those variants with which
they are in linkage disequilibrium); GCTA heritability is lowered by
imperfect tagging of causal SNPs. As a result, GCTA heritability
estimates are typically about half the heritability estimates from twin
studies. This ‘missing GCTA heritability’ is due in part to non-additive
effects and the effects of rarer DNA variants. Why then are GCTA
estimates of genetic correlation so similar to twin study estimates? The
likely reason is that the GCTA estimate of the genetic correlation is
derived from the ratio between genetic covariance and the genetic
variances of the two traits. Because GCTA’s underestimation of genetic
influence applies to genetic covariance as well as to genetic variance,
the ratio between genetic covariance and genetic variance cancels out
this bias, leaving an unbiased GCTA estimate of genetic
correlation.^[63](#bib63)^

This finding of strong genome-wide pleiotropy across diverse cognitive
and learning abilities, indexed by general intelligence, is a major
finding about the origins of individual differences in intelligence.
Nonetheless, this finding seems to have had little impact in related
fields such as cognitive neuroscience or experimental cognitive
psychology. We suggest that part of the reason for this neglect is that
these fields generally ignore individual
differences.^[65](#bib65),[66](#bib66)^ Another reason might be that the
evidence for this finding rested largely on the twin design, for which
there have always been concerns about some of its
assumptions;^[6](#bib6)^ we judge that this will change now that GCTA is
beginning to confirm the twin results.

This finding of strong genome-wide pleiotropy across diverse cognitive
and learning abilities is compatible with multiple neurocognitive models
of causal pathways. The modularity model of cognitive neuroscience might
suggest that genetic correlations among cognitive abilities are
epiphenomenal in the sense that multiple genetically independent brain
mechanisms could affect each ability, creating genetic correlations
among abilities. However, the genetic principles of pleiotropy (each
gene affects many traits) and polygenicity (many genes affect each
trait) lead us to predict that generalist genes have their effects
further upstream, creating genetic correlations among brain structures
and functions, a prediction that supports a network view of brain
structure and function.^[25](#bib25),[67](#bib67)^

In summary, multivariate genetic research—both from twin studies and
GCTA—suggests that most of the genetic action is general across diverse
cognitive abilities rather than specific to each ability. Intelligence
is a good target for gene-hunting because it indexes these generalist
genes.

#### Assortative mating is greater for intelligence than for other traits

Although the phenotypic correlation between spouses, assortative mating,
might seem an esoteric topic, it has important implications for the
genetic architecture of intelligence. Assortative mating is far greater
for intelligence than for most other traits. For example, assortative
mating is about 0.20 for height^[68](#bib68)^ and for
weight,^[69](#bib69)^ and about 0.10 for personality.^[70](#bib70)^ For
intelligence, assortative mating is about
0.40.^[19](#bib19),[71](#bib71)^ Moreover, verbal intelligence shows
greater assortative mating (\~0.50) than nonverbal intelligence
(\~0.30), perhaps because it is easier to gauge someone’s verbal ability
such as vocabulary than their nonverbal intelligence such as spatial
ability. Assortative mating for intelligence is caused by initial
selection of a mate (assortment) rather than by couples becoming more
similar to each other after living together
(convergence).^[72](#bib72),[73](#bib73)^ In part, spouses select each
other for intelligence on the basis of education—spouses correlate about
0.60 for years of education^[19](#bib19)^—which correlates about 0.45
with intelligence.^[50](#bib50)^ Assortative mating may be greater than
it is for intelligence for a few other traits such as social attitudes,
smoking and drinking, although these traits might be affected by
convergence. It should also be noted that not all of the genetic
variance for intelligence is additive. For example, dominance, which
involves interaction among alleles at a locus, is indicated by research
showing inbreeding depression for intelligence.^[74](#bib74)^ When
assortative mating is taken into account in variance components
analysis, some evidence for nonadditive genetic variance
emerges.^[73](#bib73),[75](#bib75)^

The significance of high assortative mating for intelligence is that
assortative mating for polygenic traits increases additive genetic
variance. Additive genetic variance refers to the independent effects of
alleles or loci that ‘add up’, in contrast to non-additive effects of
dominance within a locus, and epistasis across loci in which the effects
of alleles or loci interact. Assortative mating of parents increases
additive genetic variance in their offspring because offspring receive a
random sampling of half of each parent’s genes and resemble their
parents to the extent that each allele shared with their parents has an
average additive effect. Because offspring inherit only one of each of
the parents’ pairs of alleles, offspring differ from their parents for
non-additive interactions.

For example, if spouses mated randomly in relation to intelligence,
highly intelligent women would be just as likely to mate with men of low
as high intelligence. Offspring of the matings of women of high
intelligence and men of low intelligence would generally be of average
intelligence. However, because there is strong positive assortative
mating, children with highly intelligent mothers are also likely to have
highly intelligent fathers, and the offspring themselves are likely to
be more intelligent than average. The same thing happens for less
intelligent parents. In this way, assortative mating increases additive
genetic variance in that the offspring differ more from the average than
they would if mating were random. The increase in additive genetic
variance can be substantial because its effects accumulate generation
after generation until an equilibrium is reached. For example, if the
heritability of intelligence with random mating were 0.40, the additive
genetic variance of intelligence would increase by one-quarter at
equilibrium given assortative mating of 0.40, Falconer and
MacKay^[76](#bib76)^ equation 5, Table 10.6, p. 176.

The extra additive genetic variance for intelligence induced by
assortative mating is important for three genetic reasons. First,
parents share only additive genetic variance with their offspring, so
that genetic predictions from parent to offspring ought to be greater
for intelligence when polygenic scores, composite scores based on
associations of many loci with intelligence, are available. Second,
because GCTA has so far been limited to detecting additive genetic
variance, GCTA heritability should be greater for intelligence than for
traits that show less assortative mating such as personality. Some
evidence supports this prediction in that GCTA heritability estimates
for personality appear to be much lower than for intelligence, even
taking into account the lower twin-study heritability estimates for
personality than for
intelligence.^[77](#bib77),\\ [78](#bib78),\\ [79](#bib79)^ Moreover,
GCTA heritability estimates are greater, although not significantly so,
for verbal than non-verbal intelligence,^[41](#bib41),[80](#bib80)^
which is consistent with the greater assortative mating for verbal than
non-verbal intelligence. Third, because both GWA and GCTA are limited to
detecting additive genetic variance, the GCTA estimate of substantial
additive genetic influence on intelligence makes intelligence a good
target for GWA studies.

Two additional points about assortative mating for intelligence warrant
mention. First, unlike inbreeding, which reduces heterozygosity across
the genome, assortative mating is trait specific—it increases additive
genetic variance (changing genotypic frequencies but not allelic
frequencies) only for genes associated with the trait for which mates
assort and its genetically correlated traits. Second, assortative mating
induces a genetic correlation between mates for a particular trait to
the extent that the trait is heritable, regardless of whether
assortative mating is driven by genetic assortment or by environmental
factors such as propinquity. A recent study using genome-wide genotypes
showed that spouses are more genetically similar than two individuals
chosen at random.^[81](#bib81)^ This DNA estimate of genetic similarity
between spouses is substantially less than assortative mating for
education levels, suggesting that assortative mating may be driven by
‘social sorting processes in the marriage market’.^[81](#bib81)^

#### Thinking positively: the genetics of high intelligence

Unlike psychiatric and other disorders, intelligence is normally
distributed with a positive end of high performance as well as a
problematic end of intellectual disability. High intelligence is
responsible for exceptional performance in many societally valued
outcomes, as documented in long-term longitudinal studies.^[82](#bib82)^
Although many other traits, such as those related to athletic
performance, are also normally distributed, the importance of high
intelligence makes it especially interesting. Genetic exploration of the
positive tail of normally distributed traits is important conceptually
because it moves away from the notion that we are all the same
genetically except for rogue mutations that cause disorders, diseases
and disabilities.

Quantitative genetic research on intelligence indicates that the genetic
causes of high intelligence are quantitatively, not qualitatively,
different from the rest of the distribution. A recent study of 11000
twin pairs found that the top 15% of the intelligence distribution was
just as heritable (0.50) as the rest of the distribution
(0.55).^[83](#bib83)^ Most recently, in a study of 370 000 sibling pairs
and 9000 twin pairs in Sweden from 3 million 18-year-old males whose
intelligence was assessed as part of compulsory military service, not
only was high intelligence (top 4%) just as familial and heritable as
the rest of the distribution, a method called DF extremes analysis
suggested that the same genetic factors are at work.^[84](#bib84)^ DF
extremes analysis focuses on the genetic causes of the average
difference between an extreme group, however defined, and quantitative
trait scores for the population, comparing the differential regression
to the population mean for the co-twins of identical and fraternal twin
probands.^[85](#bib85)^ To the extent that genetics is found to account
for this average difference (called ‘group’ heritability), it implies
that there is a high genetic correlation between the extreme group and
the quantitative trait.^[60](#bib60)^ In the Swedish study, DF extremes
analysis showed that genetics explained about half of the mean
difference between the high-intelligence group and the rest of the
distribution, which was similar to the traditional heritability of
individual differences and implies strong genetic links between high
intelligence and normal variation in intelligence.

It is possible that scores more extreme than the top 4% of the
intelligence distribution are aetiologically different from the normal
distribution, which has been called the Genetic Discontinuity
Hypothesis.^[86](#bib86)^ The most persuasive argument for genetic
discontinuity for extremely high intelligence was made by David Lykken
who noted that a key problem of genius is ‘its mysterious
irrepressibility and its ability to arise from the most unpromising of
lineages and to flourish even in the meanest of circumstances’
(Lykken^[87](#bib87)^ p. 29). Lykken^[87](#bib87),\\ [88](#bib88)^
proposed that genius emerges from unique combinations of genes; he
referred to these higher-order nonadditive (epistatic) interactions as
*emergenic.* The emergenesis hypothesis does not necessarily predict
that different genes affect high intelligence, but it does predict that
genetic effects are non-additive for high intelligence. The hallmark of
an epistatic trait is one for which identical twins are more than twice
as similar as fraternal twins. However, in the two twin studies
described above, high intelligence did not show this pattern of twin
results and model-fitting analyses found that all genetic influence was
additive for high intelligence as well as for the entire distribution of
intelligence. Although these results do not support the Discontinuity
Hypothesis, the studies were limited to the top 15% and top 4% of the
intelligence distribution, which is far short of the extremes of genius,
which Galton^[89](#bib89)^ benchmarked as the top 0.1%.

The aetiology of high intelligence is also interesting in comparison to
intellectual disability. Similar to high intelligence, most intellectual
disability is the low end of the normal distribution of intelligence.
This has been shown most recently in the Swedish conscript sample
mentioned above, with results replicated in a similarly large conscript
sample in Israel.^[90](#bib90)^ However, extremely severe intellectual
disability appears to be aetiologically distinct, as proposed by Lionel
Penrose^[91](#bib91)^ in 1938 and confirmed in the Swedish and Israeli
studies. One critical piece of evidence is that siblings of persons with
severe intellectual disability have an average intelligence quotient
(IQ) near 100 whereas siblings of persons with mild intellectual
disability have an average IQ of about 85, about one standard deviation
below the population mean. The absence of genetic links between severe
intellectual disability and normal variation in intelligence fits with
current molecular genetic research that finds noninherited *de novo*
mutations associated with severe intellectual disability.^[92](#bib92)^

An hypothesis to integrate these genetic results for the low and high
ends of intelligence is this: Normal development of intelligence can be
disrupted by any of many mutations including non-inherited *de novo*
mutations as well as prenatal and postnatal trauma, but high
intelligence requires that everything works right, including most of the
positive alleles and few of the negative alleles associated with
intelligence. This hypothesis is the rationale for a recent genome-wide
case–control association study for cases with extremely high
intelligence (IQ\>150).^[84](#bib84)^ However, one study^[93](#bib93)^
has found no association between rare SNPs and intelligence in the
normal range of intelligence. In addition, several studies have found no
association between copy-number variants, which are typically rare
variants, and intelligence in the normal range, although such studies
may have been underpowered both in terms of sample and difficulties in
assessing copy-number variants.^[94](#bib94)^

Although the normal phenotypic distribution of intelligence makes it an
obvious target for investigating the high as well as low extremes, the
larger significance of positive genetics for psychiatric genetics is
that polygenic scores created from GWA studies of psychiatric disorders
will be normally distributed, which means that there is a positive end
with just as many people as the negative end. This implies that at the
level of DNA variation there are no common disorders, only normally
distributed quantitative traits.^[95](#bib95)^ It also raises the
question of who these people are at the positive end of the polygenic
distribution of ‘risk’ for psychological and other traits. Are they
merely individuals at low risk for problems or do they have special
powers? Thinking positively begins by thinking quantitatively—about
‘dimensions’ rather than ‘disorders’ and about genetic ‘variability’
rather than genetic ‘risk’.

#### Intelligence brings (some) genetics to ‘social’ epidemiology

It has long been known that intelligence, education and class are
correlated. The causes of these associations and their relative
contribution to social mobility is much disputed.^[96](#bib96)^
Education and social class are also well-established associates of
health inequalities, including all-cause mortality.^[30](#bib30)^
However, intelligence is a new player in health; its associations with
many health and illness outcomes and all-cause and several specific
causes of mortality have been discovered in the last decade or
so.^[97](#bib97)^

We shall explain in this section that, akin to, but broader than
cognitive and learning abilities, intelligence shares genetic causes
with education and social class, which are touchstone ‘environmental’
variables of diverse social scientists. Major human phenomena studied by
these social scientists are social mobility and health inequalities,
which are unarguably important. They are studied by sociologists,
epidemiologists and economists. Finding out why some people more than
others make positive progress in their social position through the life
course, and why some people are more prone to illnesses and early death
have drafted in the two favourite ‘environmental’ social science
variables of education and social class. Education and parental social
class are predictors of people’s social position in
adulthood.^[98](#bib98),[99](#bib99)^ Both, and the person’s own adult
social class, are associated with health, illness and mortality: less
educated people and those in less professional jobs tend to die
earlier.^[100](#bib100),\\ [101](#bib101),\\ [102](#bib102),\\ [103](#bib103)^
However, there is a third variable in social mobility research, and a
third variable in health inequalities research:
intelligence.^[104](#bib104)^ Both education and social class are
substantially correlated with
intelligence.^[29](#bib29),[61](#bib61),[105](#bib105)^

Education and social class (which is indexed by occupation, or income,
or by the relative deprivation-affluence of where a person lives) are
often assumed to be indicators of a person’s environmental
influences,^[106](#bib106)^ but they are correlated with intelligence,
which has a high heritability. Indeed, epidemiologists even use
height—shorter stature is associated with earlier mortality—as an
indicator of childhood social-environmental influences, though it has
high heritability. For example, a recent social epidemiology article
described height ‘as a marker of early life insults’.^[107](#bib107)^
Here, we emphasise that it is an empirical question rather than
something that can be assumed *a priori* as to whether the three key
variables in social mobility and health inequalities research—education,
social class and intelligence—correlate because of shared genetic and/or
environmental causes.

Twin and family studies have shown that educational attainment and
social class are somewhat heritable. For example, the pedigree-based
estimates of heritability (here as percentages of phenotypic variance
explained) in the Generation Scotland family-based study of over 20 000
people were 54% (s.e.=2%) for general intelligence, 41% (2%) for
education and 71% (1%) for social deprivation using the Scottish Index
of Multiple Deprivation.^[108](#bib108)^ The genetic correlation was
0.65 (s.e.=0.02) between intelligence and education, 0.40 (0.02) between
intelligence and deprivation and 0.48 (0.02) between education and
deprivation. An earlier report on a smaller sample (*N*\>6000) of the
same study found genetic correlations between intelligence and being
physically active outside work (0.25), fruit and vegetable intake
(0.23), ever smoking (0.45), smoke exposure (0.53) and income (0.45),
with high bivariate heritabilities for all of these.^[109](#bib109)^
Another study identified over 2500 pairs of school-age twins from
population samples totalling over 300 000 in England and the Netherlands
and found moderate to large genetic correlations and bivariate
heritability between intelligence and national examination results in
language, mathematics and science.^[61](#bib61)^ Analyses of older
Danish twins found evidence for genetic correlation between cognitive
ability and education and health.^[110](#bib110),[111](#bib111)^

GCTA studies have recently explored the heritability and genetic
correlations of intelligence, education and social class. A combined
analysis of Swedish and Australian unrelated subjects (*N*\~11 500) used
GCTA to provide an estimate of 22% (s.e.=4%) for the heritability of
years in education and 25% (8%) for attending college.^[16](#bib16)^ In
the Twins Early Development Study for 3000 unrelated children,
GCTA-based estimates of heritability were 21% (12%) for parental social
class and 28% (17%) for children’s IQ at age 7 and 32% (14%) at age 12.
The GCTA-estimated genetic correlation between parental social class and
IQ was 1.00 (s.e.=0.47) at age 7 and 0.66 (0.31) at age
12.^[56](#bib56)^ GCTA-based estimates of heritability on over 6500
unrelated people with genome-wide SNP data in the Generation Scotland
study were 29% (5%) for general intelligence, 21% (5%) for education and
18% (5%) for social deprivation.^[112](#bib112)^ The genetic
correlations were 0.95 (0.13) for intelligence and education, 0.26
(0.16) for intelligence and deprivation, and 0.45 (0.18) for education
and deprivation. Therefore, some of the variance in the social
scientists’ key environmental variables can be found in DNA variation,
some of which is shared with the DNA variation that causes some of
people’s differences in intelligence. Another ‘environmental’ social
science variable, height, shows a similar set of findings in the
Generation Scotland study sample.^[108](#bib108)^ The GCTA-estimated
heritability of height was 58% (5%), its phenotypic correlation with
intelligence was 0.16, the GCTA-based genetic correlation was 0.28
(0.09), and the bivariate heritability was 71%. Bivariate GCTA-derived
genetic correlations between intelligence and health variables will
require large numbers which are rare, as yet. An analysis of data from
the Swedish Twin Registry (*N*=5650 unrelated individuals) found
GCTA-derived genetic correlations of 0.13 (s.e.=0.23) and 0.33
(s.e.=0.33) between self-rated health and, respectively, years in
education and attending college^[16](#bib16)^).

The genetics of intelligence has a special place, therefore, in the
heretofore-named ‘social’ epidemiology. Indeed, these new findings from
twin/family-based and GCTA-based studies give a corrective to the
suggestion that ‘cognitive epidemiology’ be re-named ‘social
epidemiology’. Singh-Manoux’s^[113](#bib113)^ suggestion was partly made
because epidemiologists preferred to use cognitive epidemiology for
those studies in which cognition was the outcome, and so there was an
objection to Deary and Batty’s (2007)^[104](#bib104)^ definition, that
is, ‘the use of cognitive ability test scores as risk factors for human
health and disease outcomes, including mortality’. Relevant to the
genetic associations discussed in this section was Singh-Manoux’s
further discussion, ‘Given the association between intelligence and
education, extensively discussed by Deary and Johnson,^[106](#bib106)^
this definition of cognitive epidemiology puts it squarely in the domain
of social epidemiology, a discipline concerned with the social
distribution of determinants of health. Location in this broader church,
rather than the micro-discipline of cognitive epidemiology, will avoid a
narrow focus on intelligence that ignores its associations with markers
of social position such as education, income and occupation.’

One might say in reply that this conceptualisation ignores possible
genetic contributions to social/cognitive epidemiology. To sum up: there
are genetic causes of some of the educational and social class
differences in the populations studied, and these overlap with the
genetic causes of intelligence differences. Intelligence genetics is
special here, because it offers the possibility of finding some of the
connections between social and medical outcomes, perhaps *via* genetic
contributions to system integrity, allostatic load and the adoption of
health-promoting/reducing behaviours.^[114](#bib114)^

[Top of page](#top)

### Five special findings and polygenic scores

These five special findings about the genetics of intelligence
differences have emerged from traditional quantitative genetic research,
primarily twin studies, and they are beginning to be replicated using
GCTA. However, nothing would advance the field more than moving beyond
GCTA to G, C, T, and A—that is, identifying specific DNA variants that
contribute to the high heritability of intelligence. As is the case for
all complex traits and common disorders in the life sciences, we now
know that this will be a difficult task. As discussed earlier, GWA
studies have shown that there are no large effect sizes in the
population, which implies that the heritability of intelligence is
caused by thousands of DNA variants, many of these effects are likely to
be infinitesimal or even idiosyncratic. Nonetheless, GCTA has shown that
additive effects of common SNPs can theoretically account for at least
half of the heritability of intelligence, which means that a brute force
approach using ever larger samples will identify some of these genes. In
addition, whole-genome sequencing will identify DNA variants of any kind
anywhere in the genome, not just common SNPs.

Associations of small effect size between DNA variants and intelligence
can be summed across multiple loci to create a polygenic score, which is
analogous to aggregating items to create a scale. Polygenic scores can
aggregate a few candidate SNPs or thousands of SNPs across the genome,
called *genome-wide polygenic scores* (GPS), as described in [Box
2](#box2).

##### [Polygenic Scores.](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105b2.html#figure-title)

[![Polygenic Scores - Unfortunately we are unable to provide accessible
alternative text for this. If you require assistance to access this
image, please contact help@nature.com or the
author](/common/images/box_thumb.gif)](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105b2.html#figure-title)[Full
box](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105b2.html#figure-title)

\

Anticipating that GPS will be available for research on intelligence, we
close by revisiting the five special findings about genetics and
intelligence, drawing hypotheses that can tested using a GPS for
intelligence, an exercise that we hope will help to make the five
special findings more concrete.

#### Heritability of intelligence increases dramatically from infancy through adulthood despite genetic stability

GPS hypotheses follow directly from the finding that the heritability of
intelligence increases throughout the life course despite strong genetic
stability from age to age: Variance explained by a GPS should increase
with age, and a GPS discovered at one age, adulthood for example, is
expected to predict intelligence at other ages such as childhood.

#### Intelligence indexes general genetic effects across diverse cognitive and learning abilities

A GPS hypothesis follows directly from finding strong genome-wide
pleiotropy across diverse cognitive abilities: A GPS that is discovered
for any cognitive or learning ability should also predict any other
ability. Also, a GPS for intelligence should predict better than a GPS
for any other trait. It has been suggested that a pleiotropic GPS that
explictly targets the substantial covariance among diverse cognitive and
learning abilities will be even better than a GPS based on a single
composite measure of intelligence.^[115](#bib115)^

#### Assortative mating is greater for intelligence than for any other trait

GPS support for the previous two hypotheses seems likely because
preliminary GCTA results discussed above already provide some support
for these hypotheses. In the case of assortative mating, GPS could
provide a novel test of the extent to which assortative mating for
intelligence is mediated genetically by correlating GPS between spouses.
Another question that emerges from previous genetic research is whether
GPS assortative mating is greater for verbal than for nonverbal ability.

#### Thinking positively: the genetics of high intelligence

Finding that the same genes affect high intelligence to the same extent
as the rest of the normal distribution leads to the hypothesis that a
GPS for intelligence from unselected samples can also be used to predict
high intelligence.

#### Intelligence brings (some) genetics to ‘social’ epidemiology

Finding that, in twin and GCTA studies, the same genes influence
intelligence and social epidemiologists’ ‘environmental’ variables of
education, social class, and height can enlighten research in health and
social inequalities. It leads to the hypothesis that GPS scores for
intelligence might contribute to health outcomes and mortality, and that
these might account for some of the associations between education and
class and mortality.

[Top of page](#top)

### Conflict of interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

[Top of page](#top)

### References

1.  Burks B. The relative influence of nature and nurture upon mental
    development: A comparative study on foster parent-foster child
    resemblance. In: Whipple GM (ed). Whipple GMYearbook of the National
    Society for the Study of Education, Part 1. Public School Publishing
    Co: Bloomington, IL, 1928, 27, pp219–316.
2.  Freeman FN, Holzinger KJ, Mitchell B. The influence of environment
    on the intelligence, school achievement, and conduct of foster
    children. In: Whipple GM (ed). Yearbook of the National Society for
    the Study of Education, Part 1. Public School Publishing Co:
    Bloomington, IL, 1928, 27, pp103–217.
3.  Merriman C. The intellectual resemblance of twins. Psychological
    Monographs1924; 33: 1–57. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0093212) |
4.  Theis SVS. How foster children turn out. State Charities Aid
    Association: New York, 1924.
5.  Deary IJ, Johnson W, Houlihan LM. Genetic foundations of human
    intelligence. Hum Genet2009; 126: 215–232. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00439-009-0655-4) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19294424&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000268883800012&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
6.  Plomin R, DeFries JC, Knopik VS, Neiderhiser JM. Behavioral
    genetics, 6th edn. Worth Publishers: New York, 2013.
7.  Turkheimer E. Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean.
    Curr Dir Psychol Sci2000; 9: 160–164. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.00084) |
8.  McGuffin P. The past, present and future of psychiatric genetics. In
    Bloch S, Green SA, Holmes J (eds) Psychiatry: Past, present, and
    prospect. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2014 pp 22–44.
9.  Pinker S. The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature.
    Penguin: New York, 2002.
10. Haworth CMA, Plomin R. Genetics and education: Towards a genetically
    sensitive classroom. In Harris KR, Graham S, Urdan T (eds) The
    American Psychological Association Handbook of Educational
    Psychology. APA: Washington, DC, 2011, pp 529–559.
11. Check Hayden E. Ethics: Taboo genetics. Nature2013; 502: 26–28. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/502026a) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24091964&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
12. Manolio TA, Collins FS, Cox NJ, Goldstein DB, Hindorff LA, Hunter DJ
    *et al*. Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases.
    Nature2009; 461: 747–753. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nature08494 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19812666&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000270547500027&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BD1MXht1CisbrF&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=2c345eacc2fcf13ac49988d15fd12bdd "Article on CAS - ")
    |
13. Fisher RA. The correlation between relatives on the supposition of
    Mendelian inheritance. Transactions of the Royal Society of
    Edinburgh1918; 52: 399–433. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0080456800012163) |
14. Benyamin B, Pourcain B, Davis OS, Davies G, Hansell NK, Brion MJ *et
    al*. Childhood intelligence is heritable, highly polygenic and
    associated with FNBP1L. Mol Psychiatry2014; 19: 253–258. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/mp.2012.184 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23358156&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
15. Desrivieres S, Lourdusamy A, Tao C, Toro R, Jia T, Loth E *et al*.
    Single nucleotide polymorphism in the neuroplastin locus associates
    with cortical thickness and intellectual ability in adolescents. Mol
    Psychiatry11 February 2014. e-pub ahead of print.
    doi:10.1038/mp.2013.197.
16. Rietveld CA, Medland SE, Derringer J, Yang J, Esko T, Martin NW *et
    al*. GWAS of 126 559 individuals identifies genetic variants
    associated with educational attainment. Science2013; 340: 1467–1471.
    | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1235488) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23722424&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3sXpsFKltLo%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=c77a6d3d8a451b5a12316e712f8da357 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
17. Spearman C. ‘General intelligence’, objectively determined and
    measured. Am J Psychol1904; 15: 201–292. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1412107) |
18. Carroll JB. Human cognitive abilities. Cambridge University Press:
    New York, 1993.
19. Jensen AR. The g factor: The science of mental ability. Praeger:
    Westport, CT, 1998.
20. Johnson W, Bouchard TJ, Krueger RF, McGue M, Gottesman II. Just one
    g: Consistent results from three test batteries. Intelligence2004;
    32: 95–107. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0160-2896(03)00062-X) |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000188257100008&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
21. Gottfredson LS. Mainstream science on intelligence: An editorial
    with 52 signatories, history and bibliography. Intelligence1997; 24:
    13–23. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0160-2896(97)90011-8)
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=A1997YC82000003&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
22. Deary IJ. Intelligence. Curr Biol2013; 23: R673–R676. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.07.021) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23968918&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
23. Carroll JB. Psychometrics, intelligence, and public policy.
    Intelligence1997; 24: 25–52. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0160-2896(97)90012-X) |
24. Deary I. Looking down on human intelligence: From psychometrics to
    the brain. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2000.
25. Deary IJ, Penke L, Johnson W. The neuroscience of human intelligence
    differences. Nat Rev Neurosci2010; 11: 201–211. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nrn2793 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20145623&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3cXhslajt7k%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=63dd9780af9b828f3ac6c00836d1c46c "Article on CAS - ")
    |
26. Duncan J. How intelligence happens. Yale University Press: New
    Haven, CT, 2010.
27. Salthouse T. Major issues in cognitive aging. Oxford University
    Press: Oxford, UK, 2010.
28. Deary IJ, Whalley LJ, Lemmon H, Crawford JR, Starr JM. The stability
    of individual differences in mental ability from childhood to old
    age: Follow-up of the 1932 Scottish Mental Survey. Intelligence2000;
    28: 49–55. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0160-2896(99)00031-8) |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000086068300003&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
29. Strenze T. Intelligence and socioeconomic success: A meta-analytic
    review of longitudinal research. Intelligence2007; 35: 401–426. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2006.09.004) |
30. Deary IJ, Weiss A, Batty GD. Intelligence and personality as
    predictors of illness and death: How researchers in differential
    psychology and chronic disease epidemiology are collaborating to
    understand and address health inequalities. Psychol Sci Publ
    Interest2010; 11: 53–79. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1529100610387081) |
31. Plomin R. Genetics, genes, genomics and g. Mol Psychiatry2003; 8:
    1–5. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/sj.mp.4001249 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=12556898&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000180718400001&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BD3sXntl2ltw%3D%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=474f2f62b338281fe55067d48697e649 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
32. Yang J, Benyamin B, McEvoy BP, Gordon S, Henders AK, Nyholt DR *et
    al*. Common SNPs explain a large proportion of the heritability for
    human height. Nat Genet2010; 42: 565–569. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/ng.608 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20562875&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000279242400007&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3cXns1GisL8%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=d80b21440b1d3d9455b22564fec326d2 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
33. Yang JA, Lee SH, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. GCTA: A tool for
    genome-wide complex trait analysis. Am J Hum Genet2011; 88: 76–82. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.011) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=21167468&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000286501500007&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3MXktVejtg%3D%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=7a85c28474906b4d5626210a4f9a8ba7 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
34. Yang J, Manolio TA, Pasquale LR, Boerwinkle E, Caporaso N,
    Cunningham JM *et al*. Genome partitioning of genetic variation for
    complex traits using common SNPs. Nat Genet2011; 43: 519–525. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/ng.823 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=21552263&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3MXlvVagsLs%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=b5a79ec1dd787fe4a9acbff337a63902 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
35. Yang J, Lee SH, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. Genome-wide complex trait
    analysis (GCTA): Methods, data analyses, and interpretations.
    Methods Mol Biol2013; 1019: 215–236. |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23756893&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
36. So HC, Li MX, Sham PC. Uncovering the total heritability explained
    by all true susceptibility variants in a genome-wide association
    study. Genet Epidemiol2011; 35: 447–456. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/gepi.20579) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=21618601&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
37. Gray A, Stewart I, Tenesa A. Advanced complex trait analysis.
    Bioinformatics2012; 28: 3134–3136. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts571) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23023980&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
38. Speed D, Hemani G, Johnson MR, Balding DJ. Improved heritability
    estimation from genome-wide SNPs. Am J Hum Genet2012; 91: 1011–1021.
    | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.10.010) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23217325&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
39. Zaitlen N, Kraft P. Heritability in the genome-wide association era.
    Hum Genet2012; 131: 1655–1664. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00439-012-1199-6) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=22821350&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
40. Zhou X, Carbonetto P, Stephens M. Polygenic modeling with Bayesian
    sparse linear mixed models. PLoS Genet2013; 9: e1003264. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003264) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23408905&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3sXktlSksLw%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=1ad6391cc3d4f3dc5689df1f2f85777a "Article on CAS - ")
    |
41. Plomin R, Haworth CMA, Meaburn EL, Price T, Wellcome Trust Case
    Control Consortium 2, Davis OS. Common DNA markers can account for
    more than half of the genetic influence on cognitive abilities.
    Psychol Sci2013; 24: 562–568. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797612457952) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23501967&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
42. Vinkhuyzen AA, Wray NR, Yang J, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. Estimation
    and partition of heritability in human populations using
    whole-genome analysis methods. Annu Rev Genet2013; 47: 75–95. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet-111212-133258) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23988118&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
43. Lee SH, Yang J, Goddard ME, Visscher PM, Wray NR. Estimation of
    pleiotropy between complex diseases using single-nucleotide
    polymorphism-derived genomic relationships and restricted maximum
    likelihood. Bioinformatics2012; 28: 2540–2542. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts474) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=22843982&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC38XhsVehtbnM&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=1658df53ba819c25232d8f2b5d9fb2e1 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
44. Visscher PM, Hemani G, Vinkhuyzen AAE, Chen G-B, Lee SH, Wray NR *et
    al*. Statistical power to detect genetic (co)variance of complex
    traits using SNP data in unrelated samples. PLoS Genet2014; 10:
    e1004269. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004269) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24721987&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
45. Zhou X, Stephens M. Efficient algorithms for multivariate linear
    mixed models in genome-wide association studies. Nat Methods2014;
    11: 407–409. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nmeth.2848 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24531419&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC2cXislCltrk%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=472410eb5a9511b69c2cc81668d60b44 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
46. Deary IJ, Yang J, Davies G, Harris SE, Tenesa A, Liewald D *et al*.
    Genetic contributions to stability and change in intelligence from
    childhood to old age. Nature2012; 482: 212–215. |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=22258510&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC38XhtVKjtbg%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=0d361fd98789ae8f7acc913df8f6e0e5 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
47. Panizzon MS, Vuoksimaa E, Spoon KM, Jacobson KC, Lyons MJ, Franz CE
    *et al*. Genetic and environmental influences on general cognitive
    ability: Is g a valid latent construct? Intelligence2014; 43: 65–76.
    | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2014.01.008) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24791031&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
48. Lee T, Henry JD, Trollor JN, Sachdev PS. Genetic influences on
    cognitive functions in the elderly: A selective review of twin
    studies. Brain Res Brain Res Rev2010; 64: 1–13. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresrev.2010.02.001) |
49. Haworth CMA, Wright MJ, Luciano M, Martin NG, de Geus EJC, van
    Beijsterveldt CEM *et al*. The heritability of general cognitive
    ability increases linearly from childhood to young adulthood. Mol
    Psychiatry2010; 15: 1112–1120. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/mp.2009.55 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19488046&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:DC%2BC3cbhtVGntA%3D%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=eb412de69d5f3e39eccf31a0bf8b067d "Article on CAS - ")
    |
50. Mackintosh N. IQ and human intelligence, 2nd edn. Oxford University
    Press: Oxford, UK, 2011.
51. Plomin R, Fulker DW, Corley R, DeFries JC. Nature, nurture and
    cognitive development from 1 to 16 years: A parent-offspring
    adoption study. Psychol Sci1997; 8: 442–447. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.1997.tb00458.x) |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=A1997YE09200006&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
52. Skodak M, Skeels HM. A final follow-up on one hundred adopted
    children. J Genet Psychol1949; 75: 84–125.
53. Davis OSP, Haworth CMA, Plomin R. Dramatic increase in heritability
    of cognitive development from early to middle childhood: An 8-year
    longitudinal study of 8700 pairs of twins. Psychol Sci2009; 20:
    1301–1308. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02433.x) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19732386&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
54. Wilson RS. The Louisville Twin Study: Developmental synchronies in
    behavior. Child Dev1983; 54: 298–316. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1129693) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=6683617&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:BiyB28%2FotVY%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=5f4c09b70d9975ccdd8f9dfc2edb5a23 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
55. Trzaskowski M, Yang J, Visscher PM, Plomin R. DNA evidence for
    strong genetic stability and increasing heritability of intelligence
    from age 7 to 12. Mol Psychiatry2014; 19: 380–384. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/mp.2012.191 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23358157&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
56. Trzaskowski M, Harlaar N, Arden R, Krapohl E, Rimfeld K, McMillan A
    *et al*. Genetic influence on family socioeconomic status and
    children's intelligence. Intelligence2014; 42: 83–88. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2013.11.002) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24489417&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
57. Plomin R. Development, genetics, and psychology. Erlbaum: Hillsdale,
    NJ, 1986.
58. Briley DA, Tucker-Drob EM. Explaining the increasing heritability of
    cognitive ability across development: A meta-analysis of
    longitudinal twin and adoption studies. Psychol Sci2013; 24:
    1704–1713. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797613478618) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23818655&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
59. Plomin R. Genetics and experience: The interplay between nature and
    nurture. Sage Publications Inc.: Thousand Oaks, CA, 1994.
60. Plomin R, Kovas Y. Generalist genes and learning disabilities.
    Psychol Bull2005; 131: 592–617. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.131.4.592) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=16060804&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000230851400006&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
61. Calvin CM, Deary IJ, Webbink D, Smith P, Fernandes C, Lee SH *et
    al*. Multivariate genetic analyses of cognition and academic
    achievement from two population samples of 174 000 and 166 000
    school children. Behav Genet2012; 42: 699–710. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10519-012-9549-7) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=22700061&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
62. Davis OSP, Haworth CMA, Plomin R. Learning abilities and
    disabilities: Generalist genes in early adolescence. Cogn
    Neuropsychiatry2009; 14: 312–331. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13546800902797106) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19634033&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
63. Trzaskowski M, Davis OS, DeFries JC, Yang J, Visscher PM, Plomin R.
    DNA evidence for strong genome-wide pleiotropy of cognitive and
    learning abilities. Behav Genet2013; 43: 267–273. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10519-013-9594-x) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23609157&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
64. Trzaskowski M, Shakeshaft NG, Plomin R. Intelligence indexes
    generalist genes for cognitive abilities. Intelligence2013; 41:
    560–565. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2013.07.011)
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24563565&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
65. Baddeley A. Working memory: Theories, models, and controversies.
    Annu Rev Psychol2012; 63: 1–29. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100422) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=21961947&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
66. Giedd JN, Rapoport JL. Structural MRI of pediatric brain
    development: What have we learned and where are we going?
    Neuron2010; 67: 728–734. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.040) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20826305&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000281938900008&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
67. Kovas Y, Plomin R. Generalist genes: Implications for the cognitive
    sciences. Trends Cogn Sci2006; 10: 198–203. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.03.001) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=16580870&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000238080400003&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
68. Keller MC, Garver-Apgar CE, Wright MJ, Martin NG, Corley RP,
    Stallings MC *et al*. The genetic correlation between height and IQ:
    Shared genes or assortative mating? PLoS Genet2013; 9: e1003451. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003451) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23593038&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
69. Whitaker KL, Jarvis MJ, Beeken RJ, Boniface D, Wardle J. Comparing
    maternal and paternal intergenerational transmission of obesity risk
    in a large population-based sample. Am J Clin Nutr2010; 91:
    1560–1567. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2009.28838) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20375189&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000277841700005&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
70. Vandenberg SG. Assortative mating, or who marries whom? Behav
    Genet1972; 2: 127–157. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01065686) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=4664207&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
71. Bouchard TJJr., McGue M. Familial studies of intelligence: A review.
    Science1981; 212: 1055–1059. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.7195071) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=7195071&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=A1981LQ45100038&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
72. Mascie-Taylor CGN. Spouse similarity for IQ and personality and
    convergence. Behav Genet1989; 19: 223–227. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01065906) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=2719625&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:DyaL1M3ks1aksg%3D%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=c1397e4e8016646d6e28b88ee837e934 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
73. Vinkhuyzen AAE, van der Sluis S, Maes HHM, Posthuma D. Reconsidering
    the heritability of intelligence in adulthood: Taking assortative
    mating and cultural transmission into account. Behav Genet2012; 42:
    187–198. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10519-011-9507-9) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=21969232&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
74. Bashi J. Effects of inbreeding on cognitive performance. Nature1977;
    266: 440–442. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/266440a0 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=859611&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=A1977DA33400032&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:CSiC2s7isVE%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=2ea34af25d504472e870ea366a8992a7 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
75. Chipuer HM, Rovine MJ, Plomin R. LISREL modeling: Genetic and
    environmental influences on IQ revisited. Intelligence1990; 14:
    11–29. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0160-2896(90)90011-H) |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=A1990DV55300002&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
76. Falconer DS, MacKay TFC. Introduction to quantitative genetics, Vol
    4. Longman: Harlow, UK, 1996.
77. Rietveld CA, Cesarini D, Benjamin DJ, Koellinger PD, De Neve JE,
    Tiemeier H *et al*. Molecular genetics and subjective well-being.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2013; 110: 9692–9697. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222171110) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23708117&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
78. Trzaskowski M, Dale PS, Plomin R. No genetic influence for childhood
    behavior problems from DNA analysis. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
    Psychiatry2013; 52: 1048–1056. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2013.07.016) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24074471&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
79. Vinkhuyzen AAE, Pedersen NL, Yang J, Lee SH, Magnusson PKE, Iacono
    WG *et al*. Common SNPs explain some of the variation in the
    personality dimensions of neuroticism and extraversion. Transl
    Psychiatry2012; 2: e102. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/tp.2012.27 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=22832902&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
80. Davies G, Tenesa A, Payton A, Yang J, Harris SE, Liewald D *et al*.
    Genome-wide association studies establish that human intelligence is
    highly heritable and polygenic. Mol Psychiatry2011; 16: 996–1005. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/mp.2011.85 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=21826061&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000295214800003&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3MXht1CltrbM&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=f2d5c1572e3a59026ca1ba28d211cee4 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
81. Domingue BW, Fletcher J, Conley D, Boardman JD. Genetic and
    educational assortative mating among US adults. Proc Natl Acad Sci
    USA2014; 111: 7996–8000. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1321426111) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24843128&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
82. Kell HJ, Lubinski D, Benbow CP. Who rises to the top? Early
    indicators. Psychol Sci2013; 24: 648–659. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797612457784) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23531483&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
83. Haworth CMA, Wright MJ, Martin NW, Martin NG, Boomsma DI, Bartels M
    *et al*. A twin study of the genetics of high cognitive ability
    selected from 11 000 twin pairs in six studies from four countries.
    Behav Genet2009; 39: 359–370. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10519-009-9262-3) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19381794&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
84. Plomin R, Simpson MA, Cederlöf M, Lichtenstein P. The genetics of
    high cognitive abilities. ISIR: Melbourne, Australia, 2013 Available
    at
    [http://www.isironline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/program2013.pdf](http://www.isironline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/program2013.pdf);
    Accessed 19 May 2014.
85. DeFries JC, Fulker DW. Multiple regression analysis of twin data:
    Etiology of deviant scores versus individual differences. Acta Genet
    Med Gemellol1988; 37: 205–216. |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=3254013&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=A1988AD74600001&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:BiaA3MbltVA%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=22a044d0bb72a580edec190e624d74d5 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
86. Petrill SA, Kovas Y, Hart SA, Thompson LA, Plomin R. The genetic and
    environmental etiology of high math performance in 10-year-old
    twins. Behav Genet2009; 39: 371–379. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10519-009-9258-z) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19247827&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
87. Lykken DT. The genetics of genius. In Steptoe A (ed) Genius and the
    mind: Studies of creativity and temperament in the historical
    record. Oxford University Press: New York, 1998 pp 15–37.
88. Lykken DT. The mechanism of emergenesis. Genes Brain Behav2006; 5:
    306–310. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-183X.2006.00233.x) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=16716200&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
89. Galton F. Heredity genius: An enquiry into its laws and
    consequences. World: Cleveland, OH, 1869.
90. Plomin R, Cederlöf M, Lichtenstein P. Low IQ and mild mental
    retardation are heritable but severe mental retardation is not: A
    genetic analysis of 740 000 siblings and 18 000 twins. ISIR:
    Melbourne, Australia, 2013 Available at
    [http://www.isironline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/program2013.pdf](http://www.isironline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/program2013.pdf);
    Accessed 19 May 2014.
91. Penrose LS. A clinical and genetic study of 1280 cases of mental
    defect. HM Stationery Office: London, UK, 1938.
92. Ellison JW, Rosenfeld JA, Shaffer LG. Genetic basis of intellectual
    disability. Annu Rev Med2013; 64: 441–450. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-med-042711-140053) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23020879&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
93. Marioni RE, Penke L, Davies G, Huffman JE, Hayward C, Deary IJ. The
    total burden of rare, non-synonymous exome genetic variants is not
    associated with childhood or late-life cognitive ability. Proc R Soc
    Lond B Biol Sci2014; 281: 20140117. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.0117) |
94. Kirkpatrick RM, McGue M, Iacono WG, Miller MB, Basu S, Pankratz N.
    Low-frequency copy-number variants and general cognitive ability: No
    evidence of association. Intelligence2014; 42: 98–106. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2013.11.005) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24497650&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
95. Plomin R, Haworth CMA, Davis OSP. Common disorders are quantitative
    traits. Nat Rev Genet2009; 10: 872–878. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nrg2670 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19859063&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000271919200013&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BD1MXhsVaksL7N&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=a34a65a1a0547590124097d7194d8d8e "Article on CAS - ")
    |
96. Deary IJ, Taylor MD, Hart CL, Wilson V, Smith GD, Blane D *et al*.
    Intergenerational social mobility and mid-life status attainment:
    Influences of childhood intelligence, childhood social factors, and
    education. Intelligence2005; 33: 455–472. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2005.06.003) |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000231745700002&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
97. Calvin CM, Deary IJ, Fenton C, Roberts BA, Der G, Leckenby N *et
    al*. Intelligence in youth and all-cause-mortality: Systematic
    review with meta-analysis. Int J Epidemiol2011; 40: 626–644. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyq190) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=21037248&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000293618300011&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
98. Erikson R, Goldthorpe JH. Has social mobility in Britain decreased?
    Reconciling divergent findings on income and class mobility. Br J
    Sociol2010; 61: 211–230. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-4446.2010.01310.x) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20579052&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
99. Saunders P. Social mobility myths. Civitas: London, UK, 2010.
100. Chandola T, Clarke P, Morris JN, Blane D. Pathways between
    education and health: A causal modelling approach. J R Stat Soc Ser
    A Stat Soc2006; 169: 337–359. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-985X.2006.00411.x) |
101. Davey Smith G, Hart C, Hole D, MacKinnon P, Gillis C, Watt G *et
    al*. Education and occupational social class: Which is the more
    important indicator of mortality risk? J Epidemiol Community
    Health1998; 52: 153–160. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech.52.3.153) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=9616419&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:DyaK1c3nvFeqsw%3D%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=13a7f1a1f4868915dc74d4d61a5f91b7 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
102. Galobardes B, Lynch JW, Smith GD. Is the association between
    childhood socioeconomic circumstances and cause-specific mortality
    established? Update of a systematic review. J Epidemiol Community
    Health2008; 62: 387–390. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech.2007.065508) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=18413449&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:DC%2BD1c3ltlCmsg%3D%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=4147c298f1c42da38efffb4730387d4a "Article on CAS - ")
    |
103. Lawlor DA, Sterne JAC, Tynelius P, Davey Smith G, Rasmussen F.
    Association of childhood socioeconomic position with cause-specific
    mortality in a prospective record linkage study of 1 839 384
    individuals. Am J Epidemiol2006; 164: 907–915. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwj319) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=16987923&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
104. Deary IJ, Batty GD. Cognitive epidemiology. J Epidemiol Community
    Health2007; 61: 378–384. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech.2005.039206) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=17435201&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
105. Deary IJ, Strand S, Smith P, Fernandes C. Intelligence and
    educational achievement. Intelligence 2007; 35: 13–21. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2006.02.001) |
106. Deary IJ, Johnson W. Intelligence and education: Causal perceptions
    drive analytic processes and therefore conclusions. Int J Epidemiol
    2010; 39: 1362–1369. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyq072) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20504860&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
107. Gray L, Davey Smith G, McConnachie A, Watt GC, Hart CL, Upton MN
    *et al*. Parental height in relation to offspring coronary heart
    disease: Examining transgenerational influences on health using the
    West of Scotland Midspan Family Study. Int J Epidemiol 2012; 41:
    1776–1785. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/dys149) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23087191&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
108. Marioni RE, Batty GD, Hayward C, Kerr SM, Campbell A, Hocking LJ
    *et al*. Common genetic variants explain the majority of the
    correlation between height and intelligence: The Generation Scotland
    Study. Intelligence 2014; 44: 91–96. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2014.02.006) |
109. Luciano M, Batty GD, McGilchrist M, Linksted P, Fitzpatrick B,
    Jackson C *et al*. Shared genetic aetiology between cognitive
    ability and cardiovascular disease risk factors: Generation
    Scotland's Scottish family health study. Intelligence 2010; 38:
    304–313. | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2010.03.002)
    |
110. Johnson W, Deary IJ, McGue M, Christensen K. Genetic and
    environmental links between cognitive and physical functions in old
    age. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2009; 64: 65–72. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbn033) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19208755&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
111. Johnson W, Deary IJ, McGue M, Christensen K. Genetic and
    environmental transactions linking cognitive ability, physical
    fitness, and education in late life. Psychol Aging 2009; 24: 48–62.
    | [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0013929) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=19290737&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
112. Marioni RE, Davies G, Hayward C, Liewald D, Kerr SM, Campbell A *et
    al*. Molecular genetic contributions to socioeconomic status and
    intelligence. Behav Genet 2014; 44: 26–32. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10519-014-9644-z) |
113. Singh-Manoux A. Commentary: Is it time to redefine cognitive
    epidemiology? Int J Epidemiol 2010; 39: 1369–1371. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyq123) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20630990&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
114. Deary IJ. Looking for 'system integrity' in cognitive epidemiology.
    Gerontology 2012; 58: 545–553. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000341157) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=22907506&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
115. Plomin R, Simpson M. The future of genomics for developmentalists.
    Dev Psychopathol 2013; 25: 1263–1278. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0954579413000606) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24342839&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
116. Speliotes EK, Willer CJ, Berndt SI, Monda KL, Thorleifsson G,
    Jackson AU *et al*. Association analyses of 249 796 individuals
    reveal 18 new loci associated with body mass index. Nat Genet 2010;
    42: 937–948. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/ng.686 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=20935630&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=000283540500010&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3cXht1KmsL%2FN&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=8507bb05af715fe86ab555a5225c638d "Article on CAS - ")
    |
117. Dudbridge F. Power and predictive accuracy of polygenic risk
    scores. PLoS Genet 2013; 9: e1003348. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003348) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=23555274&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:CAS:528:DC%2BC3sXlvValtLY%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=6e891d847d78486ce64611c1eb895cc2 "Article on CAS - ")
    |
118. Wray NR, Lee SH, Mehta D, Vinkhuyzen AAE, Dudbridge F, Middeldorp
    CM. Polygenic methods and their application to psychiatric disorders
    and related traits. J Child Psychol Psychiatry advance online
    publication, 1 August 2014; doi:10.1111/jcpp.12295 (e-pub ahead of
    print).
119. Hill WD, Davies G, van de Lagemaat LN, Christoforou A, Marioni RE,
    Fernandes CPD *et al*. Human cognitive ability is influenced by
    genetic variation in components of postsynaptic signalling complexes
    assembled by NMDA receptors and MAGUK proteins. Transl Psychiatry
    2014; 4: e341. |
    [Article](http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/tp.2013.114 "Article on Article - ")
    |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=24399044&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
120. Lykken DT. Research with twins: The concept of emergenesis.
    Psychophysiology 1982; 19: 361–373. |
    [Article](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.1982.tb02489.x) |
    [PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?holding=npg&amp;cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;list_uids=6889750&amp;dopt=Abstract "Article on PubMed - ")
    |
    [ISI](http://links.isiglobalnet2.com/gateway/Gateway.cgi?&amp;GWVersion=2&amp;SrcAuth=Nature&amp;SrcApp=Nature&amp;DestLinkType=FullRecord&amp;KeyUT=A1982NX87600001&amp;DestApp=WOS_CPL "Article on ISI - ")
    |
    [CAS](http://chemport.cas.org/cgi-bin/sdcgi?APP=ftslink&action=reflink&origin=npg&version=1.0&coi=1:STN:280:BiyD3MrmslA%3D&pissn=1359-4184&pyear=2014&md5=8e36a456fa33bb9ba45a686ef1e5a32f "Article on CAS - ")
    |

[Top of page](#top)

### Acknowledgements

RP is supported by a programme grant [G0901245] and a research
professorship [G19/2] from the Medical Research Council and also a
European Research Council Advanced Investigator Award [295366]. Ian
Deary's work was undertaken in The University of Edinburgh Centre for
Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, part of the cross council
Lifelong Health and Wellbeing Initiative [MR/K026992/1]. Funding from
the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) and
Medical Research Council (MRC) is gratefully acknowledged.

[![image](/aj/images/CC-BY.jpg)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/)

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported
License. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the
Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the
license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this
license, visit
[http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

Main navigation
===============

-   [Journal home](/mp/)
-   [Advance online publication](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/)
    -   [About AOP](/mp/about_aop.html)

-   [Current issue](/mp/journal/v19/n8/)
-   [Archive](/mp/archive/index.html)
-   [Press releases](/mp/press_releases.html)

-   [Online submission](http://mts-mp.nature.com/)
-   [For authors](/mp/for_authors.html)
-   [For referees](/mp/for_referees.html)
-   [Contact editorial office](/mp/contact_eds.html)
-   [About the journal](/mp/about.html)
-   [For librarians](http://www.nature.com/libraries/index.html)
-   [Subscribe](/mp/subscribe.html)
-   [Advertising](/mp/advertising.html)
-   [Reprints and permissions](/reprints/)
-   [Contact NPG](/mp/contact_npg.html)
-   [Customer services](http://mse.force.com/nature)
-   [Site features](/mp/site_features.html)

NPG resources
-------------

-   [Translational Psychiatry](http://www.nature.com/tp/)
-   [Nature Neuroscience](http://www.nature.com/neuro/)
-   [Nature Reviews Neuroscience](http://www.nature.com/nrn/)
-   [Neuropsycho­pharmacology](http://www.nature.com/npp/)
-   [Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics](http://www.nature.com/cpt/)
-   [The Pharmacogenomics Journal](http://www.nature.com/tpj/)
-   [Nature Reviews Genetics](http://www.nature.com/nrg/)
-   [Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
    Metabolism](http://www.nature.com/jcbfm/)

NPG Journals
------------

### by Subject Area

-   #### Chemistry

    -   [Chemistry](/chemistry/index.html)
    -   [Drug discovery](/drugdisc/index.html)
    -   [Biotechnology](/biotech/index.html)
    -   [Materials](/materials/index.html)
    -   [Methods & Protocols](/protometh/index.html)

-   #### Clinical Practice & Research

    -   [Cancer](/cancer/index.html)
    -   [Cardiovascular medicine](/cardio/index.html)
    -   [Endocrinology](/endocrinology/index.html)
    -   [Gastroenterology & Hepatology](/gastrohep/index.html)
    -   [Methods & Protocols](/protometh/index.html)
    -   [Pathology & Pathobiology](/pathology/index.html)
    -   [Urology](/urology/index.html)

-   #### Earth & Environment

    -   [Earth sciences](/earthsciences/index.html)
    -   [Evolution & Ecology](/evoeco/index.html)

-   #### Life sciences

    -   [Biotechnology](/biotech/index.html)
    -   [Cancer](/cancer/index.html)
    -   [Development](/development/index.html)
    -   [Drug discovery](/drugdisc/index.html)
    -   [Evolution & Ecology](/evoeco/index.html)
    -   [Genetics](/genetics/index.html)
    -   [Immunology](/immuno/index.html)
    -   [Medical research](/medicalresearch/index.html)
    -   [Methods & Protocols](/protometh/index.html)
    -   [Microbiology](/micro/index.html)
    -   [Molecular cell biology](/molcellbio/index.html)
    -   [Neuroscience](/neurosci/index.html)
    -   [Pharmacology](/pharma/index.html)
    -   [Systems biology](/sysbio/index.html)

-   #### Physical sciences

    -   [Physics](/physics/index.html)
    -   [Materials](/materials/index.html)

### [by A - Z Index](/siteindex/index.html "View A to Z list of Nature Publishing Group journals")

Extra navigation
================

.

ARTICLE NAVIGATION - FULL TEXT
------------------------------

-   [Table of contents](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/index.html)
-   [Download PDF](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/pdf/mp2014105a.pdf)
-   [Send to a
    friend](/foxtrot/svc/mailform?file=/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/mp2014105a.html)
-   [View interactive PDF in
    ReadCube](http://www.readcube.com/articles/10.1038/mp.2014.105)
-   [Rights and
    permissions](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?publisherName=NPG&publication=Molecular+Psychiatry&title=Genetics%20and%20intelligence%20differences:%20five%20special%20findings&author=R%20Plomin%20and%20I%20J%20Deary&contentID=10.1038/mp.2014.105&publicationDate=09/16/2014&volumeNum=aop&issueNum=current&cc=by)
-   [Order Commercial
    Reprints](https://s100.copyright.com/AppDispatchServlet?publisherName=NPGR&publication=Molecular+Psychiatry&title=Genetics%20and%20intelligence%20differences:%20five%20special%20findings&author=R%20Plomin%20and%20I%20J%20Deary&contentID=10.1038/mp.2014.105&publicationDate=09/16/2014&volumeNum=aop&issueNum=current&numPages=&pageNumbers=&orderBeanReset=true)
-   [Abstract](#abs)
-   [Introduction](#Introduction)
-   [Three ‘laws’ of the genetics of complex traits (including
    intelligence)](#Three-lsquolawsrsquo-of-the-genetics-of-complex-traits-including-intelligence)
-   [What is intelligence and why is it
    important?](#What-is-intelligence-and-why-is-it-important)
-   [Five special findings and polygenic
    scores](#Five-special-findings-and-polygenic-scores)
-   [Conflict of interest](#conflict-of-interest)
-   [References](#References)
-   [Acknowledgements](#ack)
-   [Figures and
    Tables](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/fig_tab/mp2014105ft.html#figure-title)

-   [Export citation](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/ris/mp2014105a.ris)
-   [Export
    references](/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/ris/mp2014105arefs.ris)

-   [Papers by
    Plomin](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=search&term=Plomin+R)

[nature jobs](/naturejobs/)
---------------------------

-   ### [Postdoctoral Positions in Harvard Medical School For Obesity and Metabolism Research](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs/438187-postdoctoral-positions-in-harvard-medical-school-for-obesity-and-metabolism-research)

    -   Children’s Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School

-   ### [Postdoctoral Fellow in Optics](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/jobs/415999-postdoctoral-fellow-in-optics)

    -   UiT The Arctic University of Norway

[More science jobs](/naturejobs/science/jobs)

[Post a job for free](/naturejobs/science/jobs/new)

[nature events](/nature-events/index.html)
------------------------------------------

-   ### [Heinrich Wieland Prize 50th Anniversary Symposium](http://www.nature.com/natureevents/science/events/28901-Heinrich_Wieland_Prize_50th_Anniversary_Symposium)

    -   **21 October 2014 — 21 October 2014**
    -   Residenzstr. 1, Munich, Germany

-   ### [Beyond the Intestinal Microbiome – From Signatures to Therapy](http://www.nature.com/natureevents/science/events/25615-Beyond_the_Intestinal_Microbiome_From_Signatures_to_Therapy)

    -   **08 October 2014 — 10 October 2014**
    -   Herrenhausen Palace, Herrenhäuser Straße 5, 30419 Hannover,
        Germany, Hanover, Germany

[More science events](/nature-events/index.html)

ADVERTISEMENT\

[![Advertisement](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/mp.nature.com/homepage;pos=right;abr=!NN2;sz=160x600;ord=07893195?)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/mp.nature.com/homepage;type=;artid=;date=;pos=right;abr=!NN2;sz=160x600;ord=07893195?)

[Top](#top "Return to the top of this page")

[![image](/aj/images/logo_cope.gif)](http://publicationethics.org/ "Committee on Publication Ethics - external website.")\
This journal is a member of and subscribes to the principles of the
[Committee on Publication Ethics](http://publicationethics.org/).

-   Molecular Psychiatry
-   ISSN: 1359-4184
-   EISSN: 1476-5578

-   [About NPG](/npg/)
-   [Contact NPG](/npg_/contact/)
-   [Accessibility statement](/info/accessibility_statement.html)
-   [Help](/help/)

-   [Privacy policy](/info/privacy.html)
-   [Use of cookies](/info/cookies.html)
-   [Legal notice](/info/legal_notice.html)
-   [Terms](/info/tandc.html)

-   [Nature jobs](/naturejobs/)
-   [Nature Asia](http://www.natureasia.com/)
-   [Nature Education](/scitable/)
-   [RSS web feeds](/webfeeds/)

Search:

-   © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved.
-   partner of [AGORA, HINARI, OARE, INASP, ORCID, CrossRef and
    COUNTER](/info/partners.html)

![image](http://secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-bin/m?ci=us-nature&cg=0&cc=1)

![image](//statse.webtrendslive.com/dcs0zztfg00000s969s37qoal_2f6z/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=10.2.55)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.nature.com/mp/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/mp2014105a.html
