-   [Home](http://www.webreference.com)
-   [Languages](#)
    -   [ASP](/programming/asp/index.html)
    -   [CSS](/authoring/style/sheets)
    -   [DHTML](/dhtml)
    -   [HTML](/html)
    -   [JavaScript](/programming/javascript)
    -   [Perl](/perl)
    -   [PHP](/programming/php)
    -   [RSS](/authoring/languages/xml/rss)
    -   [XHTML](/authoring/languages/xhtml)
    -   [XML](/authoring/languages/xml)

-   [General](#)
    -   [3D Modeling](/3d)
    -   [Design](/authoring/design)
    -   [Design Lab](/dlab)
    -   [Graphics](/graphics)
    -   [HTML Tools](/html)
    -   [Internet](/internet)
    -   [JavaScript Tools](/tools/javascript)
    -   [Multimedia](/multimedia)
    -   [Programming](/programming)
    -   [Promotion](/promotion)
    -   [Reviews](/reviews/index.html)
    -   [Search Engine Resources](/promotion/search)
    -   [Video](/video)
    -   [Web Servers](/web-servers)

-   [Reference](#)
    -   [Color Codes](/html/reference/color)
    -   [HTML Characters](/html/reference/character)
    -   [HTML Tags](/html/reference/specs)
    -   [JavaScript Core](/javascript/reference/core_ref/contents.html)
    -   [Reference Section](/services/reference)
    -   [Site Services](/services)
    -   [XML](/xml/reference)

-   [Newsletter](JavaScript:void(0);)

Go

[![Developer.com](http://www.webreference.com/img/dev.com_logo.png)](http://www.developer.com)

[Login](http://www.webreference.com/accountManagement?formType=loginForm)
|
[Register](http://www.webreference.com/accountManagement?formType=registrationForm)

[![image](http://www.webreference.com/img/icon-twitter.gif)](http://www.twitter.com/WebReference)
[![webreference..com](http://www.webreference.com/img/icon-fb.gif)](http://www.facebook.com/pages/WebReferencecom/34005022581)
[![webreference..com](http://www.webreference.com/img/icon-rss-feed.gif)](http://www.webreference.com/rss.xml)

[![WebReference.com](http://www.webreference.com/img/logo.png)](http://www.webreference.com)

[Close](javascript:void(0))

[](http://www.webreference.com)Home /
[Programming](/programming/index.html) /
[javascript](/programming/javascript/index.html) /
[jkm3](/programming/javascript/jkm3/index.html) / Performance
Optimizations for High Speed JavaScript / Page 4

Performance Optimizations for High Speed JavaScript / Page 4
============================================================

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

\
[[prev]](3.html)

#### Performance Optimizations for High Speed JavaScript [con't]

Technique 4: Use buffering to process data in optimal sizes
-----------------------------------------------------------

For years, server engineers and supercomputer designers have known that
buffering is a key component of increasing the speed of data processing,
transfer and storage, and communication protocols. Any JavaScript
program that does data processing--be it HTML-ization of text, base64
encoding, MD5 digests, email encryption--can benefit from buffering.

Given your typical computer hardware, your operating system, and your
browser, any JavaScript program that does data processing has an optimal
size of input where the data processing proceeds at the highest rate.
Your job in optimizing your program is to find this optimal size and to
buffer your data to match that size. This "buffering" can be as simple
as splitting your data into substrings and processing each piece
separately.

Buffering is the vaguest type of optimization that we discuss in this
article, because it requires experimentation with your computer programs
in order to find out which buffer sizes will process your data in the
fastest possible way. In a sense, buffering is the most valuable
technique of them all. Hopefully, you'll understand the point of using
buffers and how to start implementing them by the time you finish
reading this page. To help you see how buffers improve performance, I
offer a historical example of buffering and then a fun contest result
that relied on buffers to win.

### A historical use of buffering

A long time ago I created a [JavaScript-based computer security program
for encrypting Web pages called Web
Cipher](http://webdeveloper.earthweb.com/repository/javascripts/2001/05/45261/cipher.html),
and then when Unicode came out I added Unicode compatibility and called
it Web Cipher 2.

There are still some family reunion pages or lists of email addresses
that are encrypted with Web Cipher 2, but most Web pages that used it
were created before anyone ever heard of Google. Many of them aren't
anywhere to be seen, part of the silent history of the Internet. The
purpose of Web Cipher 2 was to provide SSL-level encryption and data
security for free without the need for SSL certificates or the
associated costs.

The biggest challenge I faced in writing the code for Web Cipher was to
make it fast enough on the computers of the day, like 333 MHz iMacs.
(Combined with Mac OS 8.6, these computers were one of the longest
lasting systems I've ever used. The processors were extremely fast,
probably six to ten times faster than some 333 MHz processors that you
may have had experience with, and the computers could almost match the
performance of 2004 computers when 512 MB of RAM was added. Many high
schools were still using these iMacs years later.)

I determined that encrypting the data in blocks of 64 bytes enabled me
to maximize the encryption speed and reach 15 KB per second on an iMac.
That was great, considering that many available encryption methods for
JavaScript could only reach a few hundred bytes per second, and often
were less secure as well.

Quoting from the description of Web Cipher, "Web Cipher is a
client-side, cryptographically secure document encryption technology. It
allows even an inexperienced Web author to establish virtually
uncrackable safety measures on confidential data. Web Cipher is also
fast, substantially overcoming the problem of speed in browser-based
cryptology. It averages almost 15K per second in real-world tests on an
iMac 333 MHz computer, much faster than similar utilities."

"Great," you say, "I realize I have to break my input into smaller
pieces before processing it in order to increase speed, but how do I do
it?"

That's a good question. You evaluate various buffer sizes and choose the
one with the highest performance. Most algorithms suffer lower
performance at both small and large buffer sizes, so a graph of the
performance would resemble a parabola. You will see what I mean, after I
show you the source code of the encryption functions.

A simple recursion is used in order to break down the input into the
desired block sizes. To create the test input for encryption, I'm going
to use the `stringFill()` function introduced earlier.

### Web Cipher 2 code that shows successful use of buffering

By using 64-byte block sizes for encryption, the Web Cipher 2 algorithm
enabled 1999 iMacs to securely decrypt and encrypt Web pages on the
client side at 15 KB per second. Most client-side JavaScript encryption
algorithms were only able to execute at a few hundred bytes per second
at that time on available computer hardware because they didn't use
small size buffers or localized variables. (In fact, the first
implementation of the MD5 algorithm for JavaScript was written in 1996,
all the way back to the days of "`.jvs`" for JavaScript files instead of
"`.js`." It was called calcMD5 by Henri Torgemane, and on Mozilla
Firefox 0.9 it was more than ten times slower (338 ms) than md5.js (29
ms).)

/\* \* Written by Joseph K. Myers on 2001/05/18 \*/ var
cipher\_block\_size=64, encoding\_buffer=1024; function b0f(c) { return
c < 16 ? '0' + c.toString(16) : c.toString(16); } function bff(c) {
return parseInt(c, 16); } function salt(s) { var n = 0; for (var i=0;
i<s.length; i++) n += i&s.charCodeAt(i); return b0f(n%256); } function
encrypt(s,k) { if (s.length \> cipher\_block\_size) { var
m=parseInt(s.length/cipher\_block\_size),
t=Math.round(m/2)\*cipher\_block\_size; return encrypt(s.substr(0, t),
k) + encrypt(s.substr(t), k); } var r=parseInt(Math.random()\*256),
o=b0f(r), i; for (i=0; i<s.length; i++) { o +=
b0f(s.charCodeAt(i)\^r\^k.charCodeAt(i%k.length)); } return o; }
function decrypt(s,k) { var dbs = (cipher\_block\_size+1)\*2; if
(s.length \> dbs) { var m=parseInt(s.length/dbs),
t=Math.round(m/2)\*dbs; return decrypt(s.substr(0, t), k) +
decrypt(s.substr(t), k); } var n=bff(s.substr(0,2)), o=''; for (var i=2;
i<s.length; i+=2) { o +=
String.fromCharCode(bff(s.substr(i,2))\^n\^k.charCodeAt((i-2)/2%k.length));
} return o; } function encipher(f) { var s=f.stream.value,
k=salt(f.key.value), r=k, b=encoding\_buffer, p=0,
n=Math.floor(s.length/b)+1; while (n \> p++) { self.status = 'Encrypting
block ' + p + '/' + n; r += encrypt(s.substr((p-1)\*b, b), f.key.value);
} f.stream.value = r; self.status = 'Done'; } function decipher(f) { var
s=f.stream.value.substr(2), k=salt(f.key.value), r='',
b=2\*(encoding\_buffer+encoding\_buffer/cipher\_block\_size), p=0,
n=Math.floor(s.length/b)+1; if (k != f.stream.value.substr(0, 2)) { if
(!confirm('The key is probably incorrect.\\nContinue decryption?'))
return; } while (p++ < n) { self.status = 'Decrypting block ' + p + '/'
+ n; r += decrypt(s.substr((p-1)\*b, b), f.key.value); } f.stream.value
= r; return self.status = 'Done'; } /\* testing it \*/ function
stringFill(x, n) { var s = ''; for (;;) { if (n & 1) s += x; n \>\>= 1;
if (n) x += x; else break; } return s; } input = stringFill(decipher +
'', 10); d = document; block\_sizes = [2, 8, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024];
for (i=0; i<block\_sizes.length; i++) { cipher\_block\_size =
block\_sizes[i]; t0 = new Date(); encrypt(input, 'HiBye'); t1 = new
Date(); d.write('block\_size = ', cipher\_block\_size, ', time = ',
t1-t0, '<br /\>'); }

The table of the buffer sizes and resulting processing speeds are based
on the same encryption code behind Web Cipher, but the performance
measurements are obtained and tabulated from the results of modern-day
computers, rather than the fruit-colored iMacs of yore. This shows that
buffering is an optimization technique that still applies today.

### Table of the buffer sizes and resulting processing speeds in milliseconds

block\_size = 2, time = 78 block\_size = 8, time = 47 block\_size = 64,
time = 31 block\_size = 128, time = 32 block\_size = 256, time = 15
block\_size = 512, time = 16 block\_size = 1024, time = 31

On today's computers the fastest time is 256 bytes, with 15 milliseconds
total encryption time. The original block size of 64 bytes is still
fast, resulting in 31 milliseconds of encryption time. Smaller or larger
block sizes increase the encryption time in a pattern similar to the
graph of a parabola, but on large computers with lots of memory, it
takes a big block size in order to slow down the encryption.

(Note that some browsers treat strings differently, and the change in
speed due to buffering is smaller.)

### Why do buffers help speed things up?

The reason that buffering works can be explained using the example of
shopping. If you go to the store and buy only one item each trip, you
waste time making a lot of trips. If you go to the store and buy too
many items per trip you might not be able to fit everything in your car.
Somewhere in between is the correct amount of groceries that you can buy
and store per trip.

Another example is a waitress at a restaurant. If she carries one glass
at a time it's inefficient. If she carries too many she might drop them
or forget where to take them. If she carries just the right amount she
will be the most efficient.

### Today's fun buffering example

One of my favorite computer programs was a script that wrote one million
numbers to a Web page. The object was to write the numbers 1 to
1,000,000 (or 0 to 999,999) to a Web page in normally sized text as fast
as possible using JavaScript. The JavaScript output had to be nothing
but "1" (space) "2" (space) "3" (...) (999999) (space) (1000000).

How could this be done quickly? In fact, how could one script author
possibly obtain any advantage over anyone else?

The solution is to use buffering. Buffering applies not only to creating
the data, but also to how large of a block of output is submitted to
`document.write()`, how often the page is re-rendered after new content
is emitted (possibly every time `document.write()` is used), and how
much memory your graphics card can allocate to a huge amount of text to
be stored in graphics memory and cached for display on your screen.

Also, in the `document.write()` function, you can separate your inputs
by commas. This is done for a reason. Remember how slow it was to
combine multiple strings? You should use commas between items in
`document.write()` so strings can be written directly into the Web page
(where they will be joined together by the HTML parser, which does the
job faster than JavaScript).

A problem as simple as writing one million numbers is really a test of
your graphics card, browser re-rendering algorithm and your JavaScript
optimizations.

### First try at one million numbers (well, one hundred thousand)

t0 = new Date(); var d = document; for (i=1; i<100001; i++) d.write(i +
' '); d.write('<p\>time = ', new Date() - t0);

This program takes 3.417 seconds on Opera with a Core 2 Duo processor
just to write 100,000 numbers. Firefox with a different processor took 5
seconds, and Internet Explorer couldn't run it without bringing up a
false alarm about "This Web page may cause your computer to become
unresponsive," which ruins any possible benchmarking. Getting to one
million would nearly crash your computer. What a failure!

Is there any hope? Yes, because there was a script able to write one
million numbers in about three seconds circa 2002, way back in the days
of slow Pentium 3/4 processors and Internet Explorer 6.0.

In fact, on the slow library computer that I used, that script can still
cook the goose of the code above--Internet Explorer can write the entire
million numbers in 2.750 seconds without bringing up any warning about
"unresponsive."

(By the way, that program is optimized for Internet Explorer. Firefox 2
cannot run it as fast, in contrast to most JavaScripts that you might
find floating around on the Internet. Firefox 2 on the same computer is
3.375 seconds instead of 2.750.)

### The winning one million number script

/\* 11-29-02 \*/ function timer(f) { return function(x) { var n1 = new
Date(); f(x); // do something here return new Date() - n1; }; } function
m(n) { var b = new Array(n), i = 0; /\* in actuality I would like to do
b = [] \*/ do { b[i] = ++i; } while (i < n); return b; } function w(n) {
var i=0, b = t; do { b[i] += n; } while (++i < n); } N = 1000000;
function MM() { var i=1, r = N / 1000; t = m(r); do {
document.write(t.join(' '), '\\n'); w(r); i += r; } while (i <= N); } c
= timer(MM); document.write('<p\>', c(), '</p\>');

Note that the comma before the newline character avoids the extra
computational cost of appending a short one-byte string onto a long
string with hundreds or thousands of characters.

The technique that made this program win was dividing up the million
numbers into a buffer of 1,000 numbers. The numbers weren't stored as
text, but as a numerical array. An optimized function was made that
would add 1,000 to each element of the array to change the numbers from
1, 2, ..., 1000 into 1001, 1002, ..., 2000, and then 2001, 2002, ...,
3000, etc.

In order to write the numbers to the Web page, the native built-in
JavaScript function `join()` was used, which doesn't suffer the
performance disadvantage incurred by JavaScripts which add strings
together.

Also, `do` loops were used instead of `while` loops, because they are
slightly faster in most implementations of JavaScript.

Here are the results for various browsers--the only kind of "browser
war" that I refer to in this article, because the one million number
program provides a quality workout for any browser. The results are from
an HP/Compaq SR5410F with Intel E2160 2 1.80 GHz and 1.00 GB RAM,
running Windows Vista Home Premium SP1.

-   IE 7.0 = 1950 milliseconds
-   Safari 3.1.2 = 1092
-   Opera = 3463
-   Firefox 3.0.1 = Crashed, probably a problem related to a bad
    implementation of video card acceleration.

As far as I know, the only way to beat the winning program is the brute
force approach of writing a huge `document.write()` statement like this
... (abbreviated here for display purposes)

function writeM() { var i; for (i=1; i<1000000; i+=1000) {
document.write(i, ' ' , i+1, ' ' , i+2, ' ' , i+3, ' ' , i+4, ' ' , i+5,
' ' , i+6, ' ' , i+7, ' ' , i+8, ' ' , i+9, ' ' , i+10, ' ' ... ... ...
, i+995, ' ' , i+996, ' ' , i+997, ' ' , i+998, ' ' , i+999, ' '); } /\*
Joined by commas and not by spaces, mind you! We must not do all that
work and still end up paying the price of 1,000 string concatenations.
\*/ } t0 = new Date(); writeM(); t = new Date() - t0; d.write('<p\>time
= ', t, '</p\>');

... but that wouldn't be elegant, would it?

By the way, it takes 11,000 milliseconds on Internet Explorer for this
new version, so the code from 2002 still wins on IE. Internet Explorer
isn't good at dealing with messy code or a lot of code, regardless of
how efficient it might be. On Firefox, the new version goes down from
3.375 to 2.000 seconds.

[(See Figure 4)](figure4.gif "Fig. 4")

Without using a buffer, writing one million numbers via
`document.write() `takes 50 seconds with Firefox 2. By using a buffer
which outputs a group of 1,000 numbers at a time, only 2 seconds of
total time is consumed with Firefox 2. Safari 3.1.2 on a Core 2 Duo
computer (1.8 GHz) can write one million numbers in less than three
tenths of a second. Internet Explorer isn't good at running complicated
scripts or long statements such as the one in this example, and so more
sophisticated optimizations are necessary. With these optimizations
(which won a programming contest in 2002), Internet Explorer is able to
write one million numbers in 2.75 seconds on the same computer that was
running Firefox 2.

From the author
---------------

Thanks for reading about these JavaScript optimization techniques. My
name is

If you have any questions, feel free to send me an email.

Original: August 18, 2008

\
[[prev]](3.html)

##### [![Justtechjobs.com](http://images.justtechjobs.com/images/webreference.gif)](http://webreference.justtechjobs.com/) [Featured Tech Jobs](http://webreference.justtechjobs.com/)

[]()

[Information Technology Manager
(MN)](http://webreference.justtechjobs.com/CBJSViewJob.asp?ID={FF366111-E695-4E66-B6BF-22AC746345B1})\
Next Step Systems\
US-MN-Minneapolis

[SR UI DEVELOPER - JSF - Ajax - ICE Faces - Rich
Faces](http://webreference.justtechjobs.com/CBJSViewJob.asp?ID={BFC0711C-E60A-431F-BA12-9932832977B6})\
Next Step Systems\
US-IL-Chicago

[Technical Specialist – Pre-sales
(MA)](http://webreference.justtechjobs.com/CBJSViewJob.asp?ID={0C065150-2C0D-415B-BCA6-810B2C32780C})\
Next Step Systems\
US-MA-Littleton

[Search all Tech
Jobs](http://webreference.justtechjobs.com/ "Search all Jobs") | [Post A
Resume](http://webreference.justtechjobs.com/CBJSEditResume.asp "Post Your Resume")
| [Post A
Job](http://www.justtechjobs.com/CBEmpPostJobLogin.asp?CB=webreference.com "Post A Job")

\

##### ![Justtechjobs.com](http://images.justtechjobs.com/images/webreference.gif)Find a programming school near you

Zip Code: \
\
 Subject: - Select All Subjects - Computer Applications Computer
Engineering Computer Science Computer Prog. - Software Dev. Computer
Game Programming Web Design Web Development Internet Systems Internet
Certification Database Design and Development Information Systems
Management Information Technology Project Management Network Design -
Development Systems Analyst \
\
 Degree: - Select All Degrees - Associate's Bachelor's Master's Doctoral
Certificates Diplomas Coursework MBA \
\
 Online Campus Both \
\

WebReference

-   [Tip Archive](/js/tips)
-   [About](/about.html)
-   [Sitemap](/sitemap.html)
-   [Contact](/contactUs.php)
-   [Jobs](http://www.justtechjobs.com/)
-   [Subscribe](http://www.webreference.com/accountManagement?formType=registrationForm%20)

Topics

-   [Web Authoring](/authoring)
-   [The Internet and the Web](/internet)
-   [Multimedia](/multimedia)
-   [Web Programming](/programming)
-   [Website Promotion and Marketing](/promotion)
-   [Contributors](/experts)

[![Developer.com](/img/dev.com_logo.png)](http://www.developer.com)

-   [Terms Of Service](/terms)
-   [Licensing and Permissions](/licensing)
-   [Privacy Policy](/privacy)
-   [Advertising](/mediakit/index.html)
-   [Newsletters](http://e-newsletters.developer.com/)

Copyright © 2014 QuinStreet Inc. All Rights Reserved.

![image](http://www.qsstats.com/dcs17vxkl10000wkxczu5l0wa_9y2e/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=8.0.2;WT.qs_dlk=Uv0T0grIZ1YAABkzCGEAAAAc;)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.webreference.com/programming/javascript/jkm3/4.html
