[](/blog)

Be Present Now
==============

durdn is here talking about tech stuff. or so he says.

Must Have Git Aliases: Advanced Examples
----------------------------------------

Over the course of a few years I piled up a long list of git aliases.
This post will assume you know [what aliases
are](https://git.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Aliases) and you have defined
a few for yourself.

I rely on many of them dozens of times a day. And maybe some have
slipped your radar. Maybe you’ve never thought you could do some of
these useful things with an alias. Let me show you some of the cool
things you can do.

You can add all the examples below to the `[alias]` section of your
`.gitconfig`.

To acquire the full list of my aliases you can check out my
[.gitconfig](https://github.com/durdn/cfg/blob/master/.gitconfig) on
[Github](http://github.com).

### Explore your history, the commits and the code

Shorten and beautify your log command because you will use it a lot. I
have a ton of list(ls) and inspection commands that I use constantly. I
recommend you experiment with the examples below and come up with your
own variation. I type `git ls` and `git ll` several dozens of times a
day.

List commits in short form, with colors and branch/tag annotations. My
bread and butter log command is invoked with `git ls` and looks like
this:

![git ls](/blog/img/git-ls.png)

And you can have it by adding this to your aliases section:

    ls = log --pretty=format:"%C(yellow)%h%Cred%d\\ %Creset%s%Cblue\\ [%cn]" --decorate

List commits showing changed files is invoked with `git ll` and looks
like this:

![git ll](/blog/img/git-ll.png)

And you can have it with this:

    ll = log --pretty=format:"%C(yellow)%h%Cred%d\\ %Creset%s%Cblue\\ [%cn]" --decorate --numstat

List with no colors if you need to chain the out put with Unix pipes:

    lnc = log --pretty=format:"%h\\ %s\\ [%cn]"

List oneline commits showing dates:

![git lds](/blog/img/git-lds.png)

With the line:

    lds = log --pretty=format:"%C(yellow)%h\\ %ad%Cred%d\\ %Creset%s%Cblue\\ [%cn]" --decorate --date=short

List oneline commits showing relative dates:

![git ld](/blog/img/git-ld.png)

With the line:

    ld = log --pretty=format:"%C(yellow)%h\\ %ad%Cred%d\\ %Creset%s%Cblue\\ [%cn]" --decorate --date=relative

And closing the listing aliases, here is the default look for short git
log:

    le = log --oneline --decorate

#### Show the history of a file, with diffs

You can see all the commits related to a file, with the diff of the
changes with `git log -u` which i shortened to `fl` for `filelog`:

    filelog = log -u
    fl = log -u

#### Log commands to inspect (recent) history

I constantly check what was in the last commit and so I used to type
`git log --numstat -1` a lot. But now it’s only `dl` and `dlc`.

Show modified files in last commit:

    dl = "!git ll -1"

Show a diff last commit:

    dlc = diff --cached HEAD^

And if the commit you want to inspect is not the last one the typical
git command becomes even longer. For this you definitely need a
shortcut. Example usage:

![git dr](/blog/img/git-dr.png)

Show content (full diff) of a commit given a revision:

    dr  = "!f() { git diff "$1"^.."$1"; }; f"
    lc  = "!f() { git ll "$1"^.."$1"; }; f"
    diffr  = "!f() { git diff "$1"^.."$1"; }; f"

### Finding files and content inside files (grep)

Find a file path in codebase:

    f = "!git ls-files | grep -i"

Example usage:

    [nick][u12:~/dev/projects/durdn-com]
    $ git f trenches
    source/drafts/2012-11-12-more-curated-git-tips-from-the-trenches.html.md

Search/grep your entire codebase for a string:

    grep = grep -Ii
    gr = grep -Ii

Example usage:

    [nick][u12:~/dev/projects/durdn-com]
    $ git gr trenches
    source/drafts/2012-11-12-more-curated-git-tips-from-the-trenches.html.md:title: "More Curated Git Tips From The Trench
    source/drafts/2012-11-12-more-curated-git-tips-from-the-trenches.html.md:## More Curated Git Tips From The Trenches
    source/drafts/2012-11-17-must-have-git-aliases-advanced-examples.html.md:    $ git f trenches
    source/drafts/2012-11-17-must-have-git-aliases-advanced-examples.html.md:    source/drafts/2012-11-12-more-curated-git

Grep from root folder:

    gra = "!f() { A=$(pwd) && TOPLEVEL=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel) && cd $TOPLEVEL && git grep --full-name -In $1 | xargs -I{} echo $TOPLEVEL/{} && cd $A; }; f"

### Going meta: List all your Aliases (la)

Sometimes you forget all your aliases and don’t want to open .gitconfig
just to check. This simple alias `git la` will output all your aliases:

    la = "!git config -l | grep alias | cut -c 7-"

### Rename [branch] to done-[branch]

In some of my workflows I wanted to quickly rename branches prepending
`done-` to their names. Here is the alias that came out of that
workflow:

    done = "!f() { git branch | grep "$1" | cut -c 3- | grep -v done | xargs -I{} git branch -m {} done-{}; }; f"

### Assume aliases

If you interact with big corporate projects - like Java projects under
Subversion - you might run into the need to ignore certain files which
are under subversion control but you need to modify them but not commit.
The `assume-unchanged` flag comes to the rescue.

Assume a file as unchanged:

    assume = update-index --assume-unchanged

Unassume a file:

    unassume = update-index --no-assume-unchanged

Show assumed files:

    assumed = "!git ls-files -v | grep ^h | cut -c 3-"

Unassume all the assumed files:

    unassumeall = "!git assumed | xargs git update-index --no-assume-unchanged"

Assume all:

    assumeall = "!git st -s | awk {'print $2'} | xargs git assume"

### Tag aliases

Show the last tag:

    lasttag = describe --tags --abbrev=0
    lt = describe --tags --abbrev=0

### Merge aliases

Being the Branch/Integration manager at my current client, I use these
constantly to merge stuff:

    ours = "!f() { git co --ours $@ && git add $@; }; f"
    theirs = "!f() { git co --theirs $@ && git add $@; }; f"

### Bonus: Basic Shortcuts

Of course I use a ton of basic shortcuts, here’s a few ingrained in my
fingertips:

    cp = cherry-pick
    st = status -s
    cl = clone
    ci = commit
    co = checkout
    br = branch 
    diff = diff --word-diff
    dc = diff --cached

#### Reset Commands

    r = reset
    r1 = reset HEAD^
    r2 = reset HEAD^^
    rh = reset --hard
    rh1 = reset HEAD^ --hard
    rh2 = reset HEAD^^ --hard

#### Git-svn shortcuts

    svnr = svn rebase
    svnd = svn dcommit
    svnl = svn log --oneline --show-commit

#### Stash operations

    sl = stash list
    sa = stash apply
    ss = stash save

For the full list of my aliases you can check out my
[gitconfig](https://github.com/durdn/cfg/blob/master/.gitconfig) on
[Github](http://github.com). And I know you’ll ask so here is
pre-emptively the answer: the colorscheme for my shells and editors is
[Solarized](http://ethanschoonover.com/solarized) at the moment.

### Sign up to receive my next blog posts via email:

### Git Talk At Your Conference?

I can be contacted to fly over and give wonderful talks and workshop on
Git as part of my new role of Developer Advocate at Atlassian.

Email me at nick [at] durdn.com or contact
[@durdn](http://twitter.com/durdn) if interested.

[](/blog/2013/05/03/life-as-advocate-more-git-than-ever/)

#### Life As Advocate: More Git Than Ever

3 May 2013

[](/blog/2013/01/14/10-git-tips-and-workflows-round-2/)

#### Git Tips And Workflows, Round 2: basics, stashes and other bits

14 Jan 2013

[](/blog/2012/12/05/git-12-curated-git-tips-and-workflows/)

#### Git: Twelve Curated Tips And Workflows From The Trenches

5 Dec 2012

[](/blog/2012/11/22/must-have-git-aliases-advanced-examples/)

#### Must Have Git Aliases: Advanced Examples

22 Nov 2012

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

[](/blog)

Be Present Now
==============

durdn is here talking about tech stuff. or so he says.

[durdn.com](http://durdn.com)

[@durdn](http://twitter.com/durdn)

[feed](http://feeds.feedburner.com/durdn)

### Sign up to receive my next blog posts via email:

First Name

Email Address \*

### Other articles on git

[Life As Advocate: More Git Than
Ever](/blog/2013/05/03/life-as-advocate-more-git-than-ever/)

[Git Tips And Workflows, Round 2: basics, stashes and other
bits](/blog/2013/01/14/10-git-tips-and-workflows-round-2/)

[Git: Twelve Curated Tips And Workflows From The
Trenches](/blog/2012/12/05/git-12-curated-git-tips-and-workflows/)

[Using Git with Subversion: Tips that will make your life
easier](/blog/2011/07/06/using-git-with-subversion-tips-that-will-make-your-life-easier/)

[I love staring at branches and shuffle, reorder and squash
commits](/blog/2009/08/16/i-love-staring-at-branches-and-shuffle-reorder-and-squash-commits/)

[durdn.com](http://durdn.com) © 2012 [Follow
@durdn](https://twitter.com/durdn)
http://durdn.com/blog/2012/11/22/must-have-git-aliases-advanced-examples/
