[ACM QueueArchitecting Tomorrow's Computing](index.cfm)
[![image](/img/logo_acm.gif)](whyjoinacm.cfm)

[A Special Offer to Join
ACM](http://campus.acm.org/public/qj/quickjoin/interim.cfm?promo=PSAP28Q)
[Why Join ACM?](whyjoinacm.cfm)

Search Search

-   [Home](index.cfm)
-   [Audiocasts](listing.cfm?qc_type=audiocasts&page_title=Audiocasts)
-   [Videos](listing.cfm?qc_type=videos&page_title=Videos)
-   [Blogs](blogs.cfm)

[Site Feeds](rssfeeds.cfm) \
 [Queue Blog](/blog) \
 [Twitter feed](http://twitter.com/ACMQueue) \
 [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/pages/ACM-Queue/117006418374344)

#### Browse Topics

-   [Programming
    Languages](listing.cfm?item_topic=Programming%20Languages&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Programming%20Languages&page_title=Programming%20Languages&order=desc)
-   [Security](listing.cfm?item_topic=Security&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Security&page_title=Security&order=desc)
-   [Development](listing.cfm?item_topic=Development&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Development&page_title=Development&order=desc)
-   [Databases](listing.cfm?item_topic=Databases&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Databases&page_title=Databases&order=desc)
-   [Networks](listing.cfm?item_topic=Networks&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Networks&page_title=Networks&order=desc)
-   [Concurrency](listing.cfm?item_topic=Concurrency&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Concurrency&page_title=Concurrency&order=desc)
-   [Full List of
    Topics](javascript:ColdFusion.Window.show('morethemes'))

#### *New:* Translations

-   [ACM Q em LÃ­ngua Portuguesa](pt.cfm)

#### Columns

-   [The
    Bikeshed](listing.cfm?typefilter=Thebikeshed&sort=publication_date&order=desc&qc_type=Thebikeshed&article_type=&item_topic=all&filter_type=topic&page_title=The%20Bikeshed&filter=all)
-   [Kode
    Vicious](listing.cfm?typefilter=Kodevicious&sort=publication_date&order=desc&qc_type=Kodevicious&article_type=&item_topic=all&filter_type=topic&page_title=Kode%20Vicious&filter=all)
-   [Curmudgeon](listing.cfm?typefilter=curmudgeon&sort=publication_date&order=desc&qc_type=curmudgeon&article_type=&item_topic=all&filter_type=topic&page_title=Curmudgeon&filter=all)
-   [Opinion](listing.cfm?typefilter=Opinion&sort=publication_date&order=desc&qc_type=opinion&article_type=&item_topic=all&filter_type=topic&page_title=Opinion&filter=all)

#### Discussions

-   [CTO
    Roundtables](listing.cfm?typefilter=ctoroundtable&sort=publication_date&order=desc&qc_type=ctoroundtable&article_type=&item_topic=all&filter_type=topic&page_title=CTO%20Roundtables&filter=all)
-   [Case
    Studies](listing.cfm?typefilter=casestudy&sort=publication_date&order=desc&qc_type=casestudy&article_type=&item_topic=all&filter_type=topic&page_title=Case%20Studies&filter=all)
-   [Interviews](listing.cfm?qc_type=interviews&page_title=Interviews)

#### Latest Comments

-   - "Uh, I am not sure how that paper should help me. Starting by
    t?..." [The Curse of the Excluded Middle](/detail.cfm?id=2611829)
-   - "There is a golden middle: object capability model, especially
    i...." [The Curse of the Excluded Middle](/detail.cfm?id=2611829)
-   - "This pure-functional debate has been going on since I was a CS
    ..." [The Curse of the Excluded Middle](/detail.cfm?id=2611829)

[](http://techpack.acm.org/)

#### Tech Packs

-   [Cloud Computing](http://techpack.acm.org/cloud/)
-   [Enterprise Architecture](http://techpack.acm.org/ea/)
-   [Mobility](http://techpack.acm.org/mobility/)
-   [Business Intelligence](http://techpack.acm.org/bi/)
-   [Security](http://techpack.acm.org/security/)
-   [Software as a Service](http://techpack.acm.org/software/)

#### Archive

-   [Current Issue](issuedetail.cfm?issue=2611429)
-   [Past Issues](pastissues.cfm)
-   [Articles](listing.cfm) (Full Listing)

#### other acm Links

-   [CACM](http://cacm.acm.org/)
-   [ACM TechNews](technews.cfm)
-   [Washington Updates](dcupdates.cfm)
-   [RISKS Forum](risksforum.cfm)

##### Sign up for QueueNews

Our free weekly newsletter showcases all of ACM Queue's latest articles
and columns.

Your Email: Sign Up

##### Sign up for Queue-Updates

Stay up to date on the latest developments at ACM Queue, including
announcements about contests, interviews, and more.

Your Email: Sign Up

[![Agile Dev and Better SW June 1-6 Las
Vegas](/ads/Agile.png)](http://click2go.me/amcqueuew) \
\
 [![ACM Keep
Inventing](/ads/160x600_B.gif)](https://campus.acm.org/public/qj/keep_inventing/qjprofm_control.cfm?promo=DA4AQA)

[view issue](issuedetail.cfm?issue=2578508)

Multipath TCP \
 [![Download PDF version of this article](img/icon_pdf.png)](http://portal.acm.org/ft_gateway.cfm?id=2591369&type=pdf)
======================================================================================================================

by Christoph Paasch, Olivier Bonaventure | March 4, 2014

Topic:
[Networks](/listing.cfm?item_topic=Networks&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Networks&page_title=Networks&order=desc)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

-   [View Comments](#content-comments)
-   [Print](#)
-   \

### Related Content

#### [The Road to SDN](detail.cfm?id=2560327)

An intellectual history of programmable networks

Nick Feamster, Jennifer Rexford, Ellen Zegura

#### [Passively Measuring TCP Round-trip Times](detail.cfm?id=2539132)

A close look at RTT measurements with TCP

Stephen D. Strowes

#### [Toward Higher Precision](detail.cfm?id=2354406)

An introduction to PTP and its significance to NTP practitioners

Rick Ratzel, Rodney Greenstreet

#### [OpenFlow: A Radical New Idea in Networking](detail.cfm?id=2305856)

An open standard that enables software-defined networking

Thomas A. Limoncelli

* * * * *

[![Networks](focus_img/networks.jpg)](listing.cfm?item_topic=Networks&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Networks&page_title=Networks&order=desc)

### Browse this Topic:

#### [Networks](listing.cfm?item_topic=Networks&qc_type=theme_list&filter=Networks&page_title=Networks&order=desc)\
\
\

\

* * * * *

\
 [Favorite Tweets by @ACMQueue](https://twitter.com/ACMQueue/favorites)

\
\

### Queue on Reddit

*New:* Check out \
the [ACMQueue subreddit](http://www.reddit.com/r/ACMQueue/)

Multipath TCP
=============

Decoupled from IP, TCP is at last able to support multihomed hosts.
-------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Christoph Paasch and Olivier Bonaventure, UCL

\

The Internet relies heavily on two protocols. In the network layer, IP
(Internet Protocol) provides an unreliable datagram service and ensures
that any host can exchange packets with any other host. Since its
creation in the 1970s, IP has seen the addition of several features,
including multicast, IPsec (IP security), and QoS (quality of service).
The latest revision, IPv6 (IP version 6), supports 16-byte addresses.

The second major protocol is TCP (Transmission Control Protocol), which
operates in the transport layer and provides a reliable bytestream
service on top of IP. TCP has evolved continuously since the first
experiments in research networks.

Still, one of the early design decisions of TCP continues to frustrate
many users. TCP and IP are separate protocols, but the separation
between the network and transport protocols is not complete. To
differentiate the individual data streams among incoming packets, a
receiving end host demultiplexes the packets based on the so-called
5-tuple, which includes the IP addresses, port numbers, and protocol
identifiers. This implies that a TCP connection is bound to the IP
addresses used on the client and the server at connection-establishment
time. Despite the growing importance of mobile nodes such as smartphones
and tablets, TCP connections cannot move from one IP address to another.
When a laptop switches from Ethernet to Wi-Fi it obtains another IP
address. All existing TCP connections must be torn down and new
connections restarted.

Various researchers have proposed solutions to this problem over the
past several years. The first approach was to solve the problem in the
network layer. Examples of such solutions include Mobile IP, HIP (Host
Identity Protocol), and Shim6 (Site Multihoming by IPv6 Intermediation).
A significant drawback of these network-layer solutions is that they
hide all changes to the addresses and thus the paths from TCP's
congestion-control scheme. This is inefficient since the
congestion-control scheme sends data over paths that may change without
notice.

Another possible solution is to expose multiple addresses to the
transport layer. This is the approach chosen for SCTP (Stream Control
Transmission Protocol).^17^ SCTP is an alternative transport protocol
capable of supporting several IP addresses per connection. The first
versions of SCTP used multiple addresses in failover scenarios, but
recent extensions have enabled it to support the simultaneous use of
several paths.^9^

Unfortunately, except in niche applications such as signaling in
telephony networks, SCTP has not been widely deployed. One reason is
that many firewalls and NAT (Network Address Translation) boxes are
unable to process SCTP packets and thus simply discard them. Another
reason is that SCTP exposes a different API from the socket API to the
applications. These two factors lead to the classic chicken-and-egg
problem. Network manufacturers do not support SCTP in their firewalls
because no application is using this protocol; and application
developers do not use SCTP because firewalls discard SCTP packets. There
have been attempts to break this vicious circle by encapsulating SCTP on
top of UDP (User Datagram Protocol) and exposing a socket interface to
the application, but widespread usage of SCTP is still elusive.

MPTCP (Multipath TCP) is designed with these problems in mind. More
specifically, the design goals for MPTCP are:^15^

\* It should be capable of using multiple network paths for a single
connection.

\* It must be able to use the available network paths at least as well
as regular TCP, but without starving TCP.

\* It must be as usable as regular TCP for existing applications.

\* Enabling MPTCP must not prevent connectivity on a path where regular
TCP works.

The following section describes the main architectural principles that
underlie MPTCP. In an ideal network, these simple principles should have
been sufficient. Unfortunately, this is not the case in today's
Internet, given the prevalence of middleboxes, as explained later.

### The Architectural Principles

Applications interact through the regular socket API, and MPTCP manages
the underlying TCP connections (called subflows^6^) that are used to
carry the actual data. From an architectural viewpoint, MPTCP acts as a
shim layer between the socket interface and one or more TCP subflows, as
shown in figure 1. MPTCP requires additional signaling between the end
hosts. It achieves this by using TCP options to achieve the following
goals:

\* Establish a new MPTCP connection.

\* Add subflows to an MPTCP connection.

\* Transmit data on the MPTCP connection.

![Multipath TCP: Multipath TCP in the
Stack](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch1.png)

An MPTCP connection is established by using the three-way handshake with
TCP options to negotiate its usage. The `MP_CAPABLE` option in the SYN
segment indicates that the client supports MPTCP. This option also
contains a random key used for security purposes. If the server supports
MPTCP, then it replies with a SYN+ACK segment that also contains the
`MP_CAPABLE` option. This option contains a random key chosen by the
server. The third ACK of the three-way handshake also includes the
`MP_CAPABLE` option to confirm the utilization of MPTCP and the keys to
enable stateless servers.

The three-way handshake shown in figure 2 creates the first TCP subflow
over one interface. To use another interface, MPTCP uses a three-way
handshake to establish one subflow over this interface. Adding a subflow
to an existing MPTCP connection requires the corresponding MPTCP
connection to be uniquely identified on each end host. With regular TCP,
a TCP connection is always identified by using the tuple
`<SourceIP, DestIP, SourcePort, DestPort>`.

![Multipath TCP: Connection
Establishment](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch2.png)

Unfortunately, because NAT is present, the addresses and port numbers
that are used on the client may not be the same as those exposed to the
server. Although on each host the 4-tuple is a unique local
identification of each TCP connection, this identification is not
globally unique. MPTCP needs to be able to link each subflow to an
existing MPTCP connection. For this, MPTCP assigns a locally unique
token to each connection. When a new subflow is added to an existing
MPTCP connection, the `MP_JOIN` option of the SYN segment contains the
token of the associated MPTCP connection. This is illustrated in figure
3.

![Multipath TCP: Establishment of an Additional
Subflow](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch3.png)

The astute reader may have noticed that the `MP_CAPABLE` option does not
contain a token. Still, the token is required to enable the
establishment of subflows. To reduce the length of the `MP_CAPABLE`
option and avoid using all the limited TCP options space (40 bytes) in
the SYN segment, MPTCP derives the token as the result of a truncated
hash of the key. The second function of the `MP_JOIN` option is to
authenticate the addition of the subflow. For this, the client and the
server exchange random nonces, and each host computes an HMAC
(hash-based message authentication code) over the random nonce chosen by
the other host and the keys exchanged during the initial handshake.

Now that the subflows have been established, MPTCP can use them to
exchange data. Each host can send data over any of the established
subflows. Furthermore, data transmitted over one subflow can be
retransmitted on another to recover from losses. This is achieved by
using two levels of sequence numbers.^6^ The regular TCP sequence number
ensures that data is received in order over each subflow and allows
losses to be detected. MPTCP uses the data sequence number to reorder
the data received over different subflows before passing it to the
application.

From a congestion-control viewpoint, using several subflows for one
connection leads to an interesting problem. With regular TCP, congestion
occurs on one path between the sender and the receiver. MPTCP uses
several paths, and two paths will typically experience different levels
of congestion. A naive solution to the congestion problem in MPTCP would
be to use the standard TCP congestion-control scheme on each subflow.
This can be easily implemented but leads to unfairness with regular TCP.
In the network depicted in figure 4, two clients share the same
bottleneck link. If the MPTCP-enabled client uses two subflows, then it
will obtain two-thirds of the shared bottleneck. This is unfair because
if this client used regular TCP, it would obtain only half of the shared
bottleneck.

![Multipath TCP: Coupled Congestion
Control](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch4.png)

Figure 5 shows the effect of using up to eight subflows across a shared
bottleneck with the standard TCP congestion-control scheme (Reno). In
this case, MPTCP would use up to 85 percent of the bottleneck's
capacity, effectively starving regular TCP. Specific MPTCP
congestion-control schemes have been designed to solve this
problem.^10,18^ Briefly, they measure congestion on each subflow and try
to move traffic away from those with the most congestion. To do so, they
adjust the TCP congestion window on each subflow based on the level of
congestion. Furthermore, the congestion windows on the different
subflows are coupled to ensure that their aggregate does not grow faster
than a single TCP connection. Figure 5 shows that the OLIA
congestion-control scheme^10^ preserves fairness with regular TCP across
the shared bottleneck.

![Multipath TCP: Coupled Congestion Control is Fair to Regular TCP
across Shared
Bottlenecks](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch5.png)

### The Devil is in the Middleboxes

Today's Internet is completely different from the networks for which the
original TCP was designed. These networks obeyed the end-to-end
principle, which implies that the network is composed of switches and
routers that forward packets but never change their contents. Now the
Internet contains various middleboxes in addition to these routers and
switches. A recent survey revealed that enterprise networks often
contain more middleboxes than regular routers.^16^ These middleboxes
include not only the classic firewalls and NATs, but also devices such
as transparent proxies, virtual private network gateways, load
balancers, deep-packet inspectors, intrusion-detection systems, and WAN
accelerators. Many of these devices process and sometimes modify the TCP
header and even the payload of passing TCP segments. Dealing with those
middleboxes has been one of the most difficult challenges in designing
the MPTCP protocol, as illustrated by the examples that follow.^6,7,15^

Upon receiving data on a TCP subflow, the receiver must know the
data-sequence number to reorder the data stream before passing it to the
application. A simple approach would be to include the data-sequence
number in a TCP option inside each segment. Unfortunately, this clean
solution does not work. There are deployed middleboxes that split
segments on the Internet. In particular, all modern NICs (network
interface cards) act as segment-splitting middleboxes when performing
TSO (TCP segmentation offloading). These NICs split a single segment
into smaller pieces. In the case of TSO, CPU cycles are offloaded from
the operating system to the NIC, as the operating system handles fewer,
larger segments that are split down to MTU (maximum transmission
unit)-sized segments by the NIC. The TCP options, including the MPTCP
data-sequence number, of the large segment are copied in each smaller
segment. As a result, the receiver will collect several segments with
the same data-sequence numbers, and be unable to reconstruct the data
stream correctly. The MPTCP designers solved this by placing a mapping
in the data-sequence option, which defines the beginning (with respect
to the subflow sequence number) and the end of the data-sequence number
(indicating the length of the mapping). MPTCP can thus correctly work
across segment-splitting middleboxes and can be used with NICs that use
TCP segmentation offloading to improve performance.

Using the first MPTCP implementation in the Linux kernel to perform
measurements revealed another type of middlebox. Since the
implementation worked well in the lab, it was installed on remote
servers. The first experiment was disappointing. An MPTCP connection was
established but could not transfer any data. The same kernel worked
perfectly in the lab, but no one could understand why longer delays
would prevent data transfer. The culprit turned out to be a local
firewall that was changing the sequence numbers of all TCP segments.
This feature was added to firewalls several years ago to prevent
security issues with hosts that do not use random initial sequence
numbers. In some sense, the firewall was fixing a security problem in
older TCP stacks, but in trying to solve this problem, it created
another problem. The mapping from subflow-sequence number to
data-sequence number was wrong as the firewall modified the former.
Since then, the mapping in the data-sequence option uses relative
subflow-sequence numbers compared with the initial sequence number,
instead of using absolute sequence numbers.^6^

The data-sequence option thus accurately maps each byte from the
subflow-sequence space to the data-sequence space, allowing the receiver
to reconstruct the data stream. Some middleboxes may still disturb this
process: the application-level gateways that modify the payload of
segments. The canonical example is active FTP. FTP uses several TCP
connections that are signaled by exchanging ASCII-encoded IP addresses
as command parameters on the control connection. To support active FTP,
NAT (Network Address Translation) boxes have to modify the private IP
address that is being sent in ASCII by the client host. This implies a
modification of not only the content of the payload, but also,
sometimes, its length, since the public IP address of the NAT device may
have a different length in ASCII representation. Such a change in the
payload length will make the mapping from subflow-sequence space to
data-sequence space incorrect. MPTCP can even handle such middleboxes
thanks to a checksum that protects the payload of each mapping. If an
application-level gateway modifies the payload, then the checksum will
be corrupted; MPTCP will be able to detect the payload change and
perform a seamless fallback to regular TCP to preserve the connectivity
between the hosts.

Several researchers have analyzed the impact of these middleboxes in
more detail. One study used active measurements over more than 100
Internet paths to detect the prevalence of various forms of
middleboxes.^8^ The measurements revealed that protocol designers can no
longer assume that the Internet is transparent when designing a TCP
extension; and no TCP extension can assume that a single field of the
TCP header will reach the destination without any modification. TCP
options are not safer. Some of these options can be modified on their
way to the destination. Furthermore, some middleboxes remove or copy TCP
options. Despite these difficulties, MPTCP is able to cope with most
middleboxes.^7^ When faced with middlebox interference, MPTCP always
tries to preserve connectivity. In some situations, this is achieved by
falling back to regular TCP.^6,7^

### Use Cases

Two use cases that have already been analyzed in the literature will
serve to illustrate possible applications of MPTCP. Other use cases will
probably appear in the future.

#### MPTCP on Smartphones

Smartphones are equipped with Wi-Fi and 3G/4G interfaces, but they
typically use only one interface at a time. Still, users expect their
TCP connections to survive when their smartphone switches from one
wireless network to another. With regular TCP, switching networks
implies changing the local IP address and leads to a termination of all
established TCP connections.^4^ With MPTCP, the situation could change
because it enables seamless handovers from Wi-Fi to 3G/4G and vice
versa.^13^

Different types of handovers are possible:

\* First, the *make-before-break* handover can be used if the smartphone
can predict that one interface will disappear soon (e.g., because of a
decreasing radio signal). In this case, a new subflow will be initiated
on the second interface and the data will switch to this interface.

\* With the *break-before-make* handover, MPTCP can react to a failure
on one interface by enabling another interface and starting a subflow on
it. Once the subflow has been created, the data that was lost as a
result of the failure of the first interface can be retransmitted on the
new subflow, and the connection continues without interruption.

\* The third handover mode uses two or more interfaces simultaneously.
With regular TCP, this would be a waste of energy. With MPTCP, data can
be transmitted over both interfaces to speed up the data transfer. From
an energy viewpoint, enabling two radio interfaces is more costly than
enabling a single one; however, the phone's display often consumes much
more energy than the radio interfaces.^2^ When the user looks at the
screen (e.g., while waiting for a Web page), increasing the download
speed by combining two interfaces could reduce the display usage and
thus the energy consumption.

As an illustration, let's analyze the operation of MPTCP in real Wi-Fi
and 3G networks. The scenario is simple but representative of many
situations. A user starts a download inside a building over Wi-Fi and
then moves outside. The Wi-Fi connectivity is lost as the user moves,
but thanks to MPTCP the data transfer is not affected. Figure 6 shows a
typical MPTCP trace collected by using both 3G and Wi-Fi. The x-axis
shows the time since the start of the data transfer, while the y-axis
displays the evolution of the sequence numbers of the outgoing packets.

![Multipath TCP: 3G/WiFi Handover with Multipath
TCP](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch6.png)

For this transfer, MPTCP was configured to use both Wi-Fi and 3G
simultaneously to maximize performance. The blue curve shows the
evolution of the TCP sequence numbers on the TCP subflow over the 3G
interface. The 3G subflow starts by transmitting at a regular rate.
Between seconds 14 and 24, the 3G interface provides a lower throughput.
This can be explained by higher congestion or a weaker radio signal
since the smartphone moves inside the building during this period. After
this short period, the 3G subflow continues to transmit at a constant
rate. Note that TCP does not detect any loss over the 3G interface. The
black curve shows the evolution of the TCP sequence number on the Wi-Fi
subflow. The red crosses represent retransmitted packets.

A comparison of the 3G and Wi-Fi curves reveals that Wi-Fi is usually
faster than 3G, but packets are more frequently lost over the Wi-Fi
interface. While the smartphone moves, there are short periods of time
during which the Wi-Fi interface behaves like a black hole. The
interface seems to be active, but no packet is transmitted correctly.
These periods can last several seconds and severely impact the user
experience when Wi-Fi is used alone. With MPTCP, the packets that are
lost over the Wi-Fi interface are automatically retransmitted over the
3G subflow, and the MPTCP connection continues without interruption.

The upper gray curve shows the evolution of this MPTCP connection based
on the returned acknowledgments. During the first seven seconds, MPTCP
aggregates the Wi-Fi and 3G interfaces perfectly. The MPTCP throughput
is the sum of the throughput of the two interfaces. Then a few packets
are lost over the Wi-Fi interface. The first vertical bar on the gray
curve corresponds to the reception of the first acknowledgment after the
recovery of these losses. When the Wi-Fi interface is weak, the MPTCP
throughput varies with the quality of the interface, but the data
transfer continues. This ability to exploit the available interfaces
quickly is a key benefit of MPTCP from a performance viewpoint.

Improving the data-transfer performance is not the only use case for
MPTCP on smartphones.^13^ It is also possible to use only the 3G
interface as a backup instead of enabling both the Wi-Fi and the 3G
interfaces. When the Wi-Fi interface is active, all data is sent over
it. If it becomes inactive, MPTCP automatically switches to the 3G
interface to continue the data transfer and stops using it as soon as
the Wi-Fi interface comes back.

Another possible use case is the 802.11 community network. Many cities
are now covered by a large number of Wi-Fi access points accessible to
many users.^3^ The density of these access points makes it possible for
slow-moving users to rely mainly on Wi-Fi for Internet access and on
MPTCP to maintain the connections when moving from one access point to
another.

The smartphone use case has motivated Apple to implement MPTCP in iOS 7.
As of this writing, MPTCP is not yet available through the socket API on
iOS 7 and is used only to support the Siri voice-recognition
application. It is also possible to use the MPTCP Linux kernel on some
recent rooted Android smartphones (see
[http://multipath-tcp.org/](http://multipath-tcp.org/)).

#### MPTCP in the Data Center

Another important use case for MPTCP lies in data centers.^14^ Today,
most servers are equipped with several high-speed interfaces, which can
be combined to achieve either higher performance or better resilience to
failures. When two or more interfaces are grouped together to improve
performance, they are usually attached to the same switch, as
illustrated on the left-hand side of figure 7. To enable TCP to use
these two interfaces efficiently, they usually appear as a single
logical interface having one MAC address and one IP address. The bonding
driver on the server distributes the packets over the combined
interfaces; several load-balancing algorithms exist.^4^ A round-robin
system allows efficient spreading of the packets over the different
interfaces. If the links have different delays, however, it causes
reordering, which hurts TCP performance.

![Multipath TCP: Link Bonding for Performance (Left) and Availability
(Right)](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch7.png)

Most deployments opt for hash-based load-balancing techniques. Some
fields of the Ethernet and IP and/or TCP headers are hashed to select
the outgoing interface. Thanks to this hashing, the packets that belong
to the same TCP connection are sent over the same interface to prevent
reordering, and packets belonging to different connections are spread
over the available interfaces. This solution works well if the traffic
is composed of a large number of short TCP connections. Since all the
packets belonging to one TCP connection are sent over the same
interface, however, a single TCP connection cannot achieve a higher
throughput than the link it uses. This is a major limitation, given that
long TCP connections are frequent in data centers.^1^

In some deployments, two or more interfaces are combined to improve
availability. In this case, each interface is attached to a different
switch, as illustrated on the right-hand side of figure 7. Most
deployments opt for using the same MAC and IP addresses on the two
interfaces. One interface is used to carry all packets, and the other
serves as a backup. When this mode is chosen, only one interface at a
time is used to carry packets.

With MPTCP, it is possible both to improve performance and to achieve
high availability. A typical MPTCP-aware server design would use two
interfaces attached to different switches, as illustrated in figure 8.
Each interface has its own MAC and IP addresses. Once an MPTCP
connection has been initiated over one interface, MPTCP will announce
the other available IP addresses to the remote host by using the
`ADD_ADDR` option,^6^ and subflows will be established over these
interfaces.

![Multipath TCP: Link Bonding with Multipath TCP Needs One IP Address
Per
Interface](http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591369/paasch8.png)

Once these subflows have been established, the MPTCP congestion-control
scheme will dynamically spread the load over the available interfaces.
If one interface or any intermediate switch fails, MPTCP automatically
changes to the remaining paths.

Note that in contrast with existing load-balancing solutions, the
interfaces used by MPTCP do not need to have the same bandwidth. This
allows MPTCP to increase the throughput even for a single data stream by
distributing the load over all interfaces. Indeed, the Linux kernel
implementation of MPTCP described earlier^11^ allowed memory-to-memory
transfers between two high-end servers, each equipped with six 10-Gbps
interfaces. MPTCP was able to use the capacity of the six interfaces
efficiently and reached 53 Gbps for a single connection.^12^

On the server side, most experiments with MPTCP have been performed with
the Linux MPTCP kernel (available from
[http://multipath-tcp.org](http://multipath-tcp.org)). A FreeBSD
implementation is being developed, and one commercial load balancer
supports MPTCP.^5^

### Conclusion

MPTCP is a major extension to TCP. By decoupling TCP from IP, TCP is at
last able to support multihomed hosts. With the growing importance of
wireless networks, multihoming is becoming the norm instead of the
exception. Smartphones and data centers are the first use cases where
MPTCP can provide benefits.

#### Acknowledgments

The development of MPTCP has been a collective work involving many
researchers, including SÃ©bastien BarrÃ©, Gregory Detal, Fabien Duchene,
Phil Eardley, Alan Ford, Mark Handley, Benjamin Hesmans, and Costin
Raiciu. This work has been supported by the European Commission under
FP7 (the seventh Framework Programme for Research) projects Trilogy,
CHANGE, and Trilogy 2; a gift from Google; and the Bestcom IAP.

#### References

\1. Benson, T., Akella, A., Maltz, D. A. 2010. Network traffic
characteristics of data centers in the wild. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement (IMC).

\2. Carroll, A., Heiser, G. 2010. An analysis of power consumption in a
smartphone. In Proceedings of the Usenix Annual Technical Conference
(USENIXATC).

\3. Castignani, G., Blanc, A., Lampropulos, A., Montavont, N. 2012.
Urban 802.11 community networks for mobile users: current deployments
and prospectives. *Mobile Networks and Applications* 17(6): 796-807.

\4. Davis, T., et al. 2011. Linux Ethernet bonding driver how-to;
[https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/networking/bonding.txt](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/networking/bonding.txt).

\5. Eardley, P. 2013. Survey of MPTCP implementations. Internet draft,
work in progress;
[http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-eardley-mptcp-implementations-survey-02](http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-eardley-mptcp-implementations-survey-02).

\6. Ford, A., Raiciu, C., Handley, M., Bonaventure, O. 2013. TCP
extensions for multipath operation with multiple addresses. RFC6824;
[http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6824.txt](http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6824.txt).

\7. Hesmans, B., Duchene, F., Paasch, C., Detal, G., Bonaventure, O.
2013. Are TCP extensions middlebox-proof? In Proceedings of the 2013
Workshop on Hot Topics in Middleboxes and Network Function
Virtualization (Hot-Middlebox).

\8. Honda, M., Nishida, Y., Raiciu, C., Greenhalgh, A., Handley, M.,
Tokuda, H. 2011. Is it still possible to extend TCP? In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC).

\9. Iyengar, J. R., Amer, P. D., Stewart, R. 2006. Concurrent multipath
transfer using SCTP multihoming over independent end-to-end paths.
*IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking* 14(5): 951-964.

\10. Khalili, R., Gast, N., Popovic, M., Upadhyay, U., Le Boudec, J.-Y.
2012. MPTCP is not Pareto-optimal: performance issues and a possible
solution. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Conference on
Emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies (CoNEXT).

\11. Paasch, C., BarrÃ©, S., Detal, G., Duchene, F. 2014. Linux kernel
implementation of Multipath TCP;
[http://multipath-tcp.org](http://multipath-tcp.org).

\12. Paasch, C., Detal, G., BarrÃ©, S., Duchene, F., Bonaventure, O.
2013. The fastest TCP connection with MultiPath TCP;
[http://multipath-tcp.org/pmwiki.php?n=Main.50Gbps](http://multipath-tcp.org/pmwiki.php?n=Main.50Gbps).

\13. Paasch, C., Detal, G., Duchene, F., Raiciu, C., Bonaventure, O.
2012. Exploring mobile/Wi-Fi handover with Multipath TCP. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Cellular Networks: Operations,
Challenges, and Future Design (CellNet).

\14. Raiciu, C., BarrÃ©, S., Pluntke, C., Greenhalgh, A., Wischik, D.,
Handley, M. 2011. Improving datacenter performance and robustness with
Multipath TCP. ACM SIGCOMM *Computer Communication Review* 41(4):
266-277.

\15. Raiciu, C., Paasch, C., BarrÃ©, S., Ford, A., Honda, M., Duchene,
F., Bonaventure, O., Handley, M. 2012. How hard can it be? Designing and
implementing a deployable Multipath TCP. In Proceedings of the 9th
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI).

\16. Sherry, J., Hasan, S., Scott, C. Krishnamurthy, A., Ratnasamy, S.,
Sekar, V. 2012. Making middleboxes someone else's problem: network
processing as a cloud service. ACM SIGCOMM *Computer Communication
Review* 42(4): 13-24.

\17. Stewart, R. Xie, Q. 2001. *Stream Control Transmission Protocol
(SCTP): A Reference Guide.* Addison-Wesley.

\18. Wischik, D., Raiciu, C. Greenhalgh, A., Handley, M. 2011. Design,
implementation and evaluation of congestion control for Multipath TCP.
In Proceedings of the 8th Usenix Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI).

LOVE IT, HATE IT? LET US KNOW

feedback@queue.acm.org

**Christoph Paasch** is a Ph.D student at UniversitÃ© catholique de
Louvain (Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium), where he leads the development of
Multipath TCP in the Linux kernel.

**Olivier Bonaventure** is a professor at UniversitÃ© catholique de
Louvain (Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium), where he leads the networking
group. His research focuses on Internet protocols. He wrote an open
source networking textbook and is education director of ACM SIGCOMM.

Â© 2014 ACM 1542-7730/14/0200 $10.00

![acmqueue](img/q%20stamp_small.jpg)\
\
 *Originally published in Queue vol. 12, no. 2*â \
 see this item in the [ACM Digital
Library](http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2591369)

[Back to top](#)

### Comments

Leave this field empty

Post a Comment:

Name (Required)

E-Mail (Required)

Comment (Required - 4,000 character limit - HTML syntax is **not**
allowed and **will be removed**)

-   [About Queue](whatisqueue.cfm)
-   [Author Guidelines](author_guidelines.cfm)
-   [Editorial Board](editorialboard.cfm)
-   [Join ACM](whyjoinacm.cfm)
-   [Advertising](http://www.acm-media.org)

-   [RSS Feeds](rssfeeds.cfm)
-   [Privacy Policy](privacypolicy.cfm)
-   [Contact us](contactus.cfm)
-   [LOVE IT, HATE IT? LET US KNOW](feedback.cfm)

Â© 2014 ACM, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2591369
