![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/social/facebook_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/social/twitter_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/about_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/home_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/mag_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/subscribe_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/blogs_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/about_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/home_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/mag_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/subscribe_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/blogs_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/arrow_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/right_arrow_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/left_arrow_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/play.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/auth/submit_mo.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/auth/logout_mo.png)

*Jacobin* needs your help!
--------------------------

What's coming in 2014?

A book series with Verso

A nationwide series of reading groups

New audio and video content \
 [...and much
more](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2013/12/our-plans-for-2014-support-jacobin-today/)

[/ a magazine of culture and polemic](/)

[](#)

-   [Home](https://www.jacobinmag.com/)
-   [Blogs](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/blogs)
-   [In The
    Magazine](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/alive-in-the-sunshine/)
-   [About Us](https://www.jacobinmag.com/about/)
-   [Subscribe](https://www.jacobinmag.com/subscribe/)

[Four Futures](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2011/12/four-futures/)
----------------------------------------------------------------

[Issue 5: Phase Two](/issue/phase-two)

[Essays](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/magazine/types/essays/)

by [Peter
Frase](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/peter-frase/ "Posts by Peter Frase")

![FourFutures\_600\_330](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/FourFutures_600_330.png)

In [his speech](http://pastebin.com/2VGhtyuJ) to the Occupy Wall Street
encampment at Zuccotti Park, Slavoj Žižek lamented that “It’s easy to
imagine the end of the world, but we cannot imagine the end of
capitalism.” It’s a paraphrase of a remark that [Fredric
Jameson](http://www.newleftreview.org/?view=2449) made some years ago,
when the hegemony of neoliberalism still appeared absolute. Yet the very
existence of Occupy Wall Street suggests that the end of capitalism has
become a bit easier to imagine of late. At first, this imagining took a
mostly grim and dystopian form: at the height of the financial crisis,
with the global economy seemingly in full collapse, the end of
capitalism looked like it might be the beginning of a period of anarchic
violence and misery. And still it might, with the Eurozone teetering on
the edge of collapse as I write. But more recently, the spread of global
protest from Cairo to Madrid to Madison to Wall Street has given the
Left some reason to timidly raise its hopes for a better future after
capitalism.

One thing we can be certain of is that capitalism *will* end. Maybe not
soon, but probably before too long; humanity has never before managed to
craft an eternal social system, after all, and capitalism is a notably
more precarious and volatile order than most of those that preceded it.
The question, then, is what will come next. Rosa Luxemburg, reacting to
the beginnings of World War I, [cited a
line](http://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1915/junius/ch01.htm)
from Engels: “Bourgeois society stands at the crossroads, either
transition to socialism or regression into barbarism.” In that spirit I
offer a thought experiment, an attempt to make sense of our possible
futures. These are a few of the socialisms we may reach if a resurgent
Left is successful, and the barbarisms we may be consigned to if we
fail.

Much of the literature on post-capitalist economies is preoccupied with
the problem of managing labor in the absence of capitalist bosses.
However, I will begin by assuming that problem away, in order to better
illuminate other aspects of the issue. This can be done simply by
extrapolating capitalism’s tendency toward ever-increasing automation,
which makes production ever-more efficient while simultaneously
challenging the system’s ability to create jobs, and therefore to
sustain demand for what is produced. This theme has been resurgent of
late in bourgeois thought: in September 2011, *Slate*’s Farhad Manjoo
wrote a long series on “The Robot Invasion,” and shortly thereafter two
MIT economists published *Race**Against**the**Machine*, an e-book in
which they argued that automation was rapidly overtaking many of the
areas that until recently served as the capitalist economy’s biggest
motors of job creation. From fully automatic car factories to computers
that can diagnose medical conditions, robotization is overtaking not
only manufacturing, but much of the service sector as well.

Taken to its logical extreme, this dynamic brings us to the point where
the economy does not require human labor at all. This does not
automatically bring about the end of work or of wage labor, as has been
falsely predicted over and over in response to new technological
developments. But it does mean that human societies will increasingly
face the *possibility* of freeing people from involuntary labor. Whether
we take that opportunity, and how we do so, will depend on two major
factors, one material and one social. The first question is resource
scarcity: the ability to find cheap sources of energy, to extract or
recycle raw materials, and generally to depend on the Earth’s capacity
to provide a high material standard of living to all. A society that has
both labor-replacing technology and abundant resources can overcome
scarcity in a thoroughgoing way that a society with only the first
element cannot. The second question is political: what kind of society
will we be? One in which all people are treated as free and equal
beings, with an equal right to share in society’s wealth? Or a
hierarchical order in which an elite dominates and controls the masses
and their access to social resources?

There are therefore four logical combinations of the two oppositions,
resource abundance vs. scarcity and egalitarianism vs. hierarchy. To put
things in somewhat vulgar-Marxist terms, the first axis dictates the
economic base of the post-capitalist future, while the second pertains
to the socio-political superstructure. Two possible futures are
socialisms (only one of which I will actually call by that name) while
the other two are contrasting flavors of barbarism.

#### Egalitarianism and abundance: communism

There is a famous passage [in the third volume of
*Capital*](http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1894-c3/ch48.htm),
in which Marx distinguishes between a “realm of necessity” and a “realm
of freedom.” In the realm of necessity we must “wrestle with Nature to
satisfy [our] wants, to maintain and reproduce life”, by means of
physical labor in production. This realm of necessity, Marx says, exists
“in all social formations and under all possible modes of production”,
presumably including socialism. What distinguishes socialism, then, is
that production is rationally planned and democratically organized,
rather than operating at the whim of the capitalist or the market. For
Marx, however, this level of society was not the true objective of the
revolution, but merely a precondition for “that development of human
energy which is an end in itself, the true realm of freedom, which,
however, can blossom forth only with this realm of necessity as its
basis.”

Elsewhere, Marx suggests that one day we may be able to free ourselves
from the realm of necessity altogether. In the “[Critique of the Gotha
Program](http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/ch01.htm),”
he imagines that:

> In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving
> subordination of the individual to the division of labor, and
> therewith also the antithesis between mental and physical labor, has
> vanished; after labor has become not only a means of life but life’s
> prime want; after the productive forces have also increased with the
> all-around development of the individual, and all the springs of
> co-operative wealth flow more abundantly – only then then can the
> narrow horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and
> society inscribe on its banners: From each according to his ability,
> to each according to his needs!

Marx’s critics have often turned this passage against him, portraying it
as a hopelessly improbable utopia. What possible society could be so
productive that humans are entirely liberated from having to perform
some kind of involuntary and unfulfilling labor? Yet the promise of
widespread automation is that it could enact just such a liberation, or
at least approach it—if, that is, we find a way to deal with the need to
generate power and secure resources. But recent technological
developments have taken place not just in the production of commodities,
but in the generation of the energy needed to operate the automatic
factories and 3-D printers of the future. Hence one possible
post-scarcity future combines labor-saving technology with an
alternative to the current energy regime, which is ultimately limited by
both the physical scarcity and ecological destructiveness of fossil
fuels. This is far from guaranteed, but there are hopeful indicators.
The cost of producing and operating solar panels, for example, has been
[falling
dramatically](http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/2011/03/16/smaller-cheaper-faster-does-moores-law-apply-to-solar-cells/)
over the past decade; on the current path they would be cheaper than our
current electricity sources by 2020. If cheap energy and automation are
combined with methods of efficiently fabricating or recycling raw
materials, then we have truly left behind ‘the economy’ as a social
mechanism for managing scarcity. What lies over that horizon?

It’s not that all work would cease, in the sense that we would all just
sit around in dissipation and torpor. For as Marx puts it, “labor has
become not only a means of life but life’s prime want.” Whatever
activities and projects we undertook, we would participate in them
because we found them inherently fulfilling, not because we needed a
wage or owed our monthly hours to the cooperative. This is hardly so
implausible, considering the degree to which decisions about work are
already driven by non-material considerations, among those who are
privileged enough to have the option: millions of people choose to go to
graduate school, or become social workers, or start small organic farms,
even when far more lucrative careers are open to them.

The demise of wage labor may seem like a faraway dream today. But once
upon a time – before the labor movement retreated from the demand from
shorter hours, and before the stagnation and reversal of the long trend
toward reduced work weeks – people actually worried about what we would
do after being liberated from work. In an essay on “Economic
possibilities for our grandchildren”, John Maynard Keynes predicted that
within a few generations, “man will be faced with his real, his
permanent problem – how to use his freedom from pressing economic cares,
how to occupy the leisure, which science and compound interest will have
won for him, to live wisely and agreeably and well.” And in a recently
published discussion from 1956, Max Horkheimer begins by casually
remarking to Theodor Adorno that “nowadays we have enough by way of
productive forces; it is obvious that we could supply the entire world
with goods and could then attempt to abolish work as a necessity for
human beings.”

And Keynes and Adorno lived in a world where industry only appeared
possible at a very large scale, whether in capitalist factories or state
run enterprises; that form of industry implies hierarchy no matter what
social formation it is embedded in. But recent technological advances
suggest the possibility of returning to a less centralized structure,
without drastically lowering material standards of living: the
proliferation of 3-D printers and small scale ‘fabrication laboratories’
is making it increasingly possible to reduce the scale of at least some
manufacturing without completely sacrificing productivity. Thus, insofar
as some human labor is still required in production in our imagined
communist future, it could take the form of small collectives rather
than capitalist or state run firms.

But getting past wage labor economically also means getting past it
*socially*, and this entails deep changes in our priorities and our way
of life. If we want to imagine a world where work is no longer a
necessity, it’s probably more fruitful to draw on fiction than theory.
Indeed, many people are already familiar with the utopia of a
post-scarcity communism, because it has been represented in one of our
most familiar works of popular culture: *Star**Trek*. The economy and
society of that show is premised on two basic technical elements. One is
the technology of the ‘replicator’, which is capable of materializing
any object out of thin air, with only the press of a button. The other
is a fuzzily described source of apparently free (or nearly free)
energy, which runs the replicators as well as everything else on the
show.

The communistic quality of the *Star**Trek* universe is often obscured
because the films and TV shows are centered on the military hierarchy of
Starfleet, which explores the galaxy and comes into conflict with alien
races. But even this seems to be largely a voluntarily chosen hierarchy,
drawing those who seek a life of adventure and exploration; to the
extent that we see glimpses of civilian life, it seems mostly untroubled
by hierarchy or compulsion. And to the extent that the show departs from
communist utopia, it is because its writers introduce the external
threat of hostile alien races or scarce resources in order to produce
sufficient dramatic tension.

It is not necessary to conjure starships and aliens in order to imagine
the tribulations of a communist future, however. Cory Doctorow’s novel
*Down**and**Out**in**the**Magic**Kingdom* imagines a post-scarcity world
that is set in a recognizable extrapolation of the present day United
States. Just as in *Star**Trek*, material scarcity has been superseded
in this world. But Doctorow grasps that within human societies, certain
immaterial goods will always be inherently scarce: reputation, respect,
esteem among one’s peers. Thus the book revolves around various
characters’ attempts to accumulate ‘whuffie’, which are a kind of
virtual brownie points that represent the goodwill you have accumulated
from others. Whuffie, in turn, is used to determine who holds authority
in any voluntary collective enterprise – such as, in the novel, running
Disneyland.

The value of Doctorow’s book, in contrast to *Star**Trek*, is that it
treats a post-scarcity world as one with its own hierarchies and
conflicts, rather than one in which all live in perfect harmony and
politics comes to a halt. Reputation, like capital, can be accumulated
in an unequal and self-perpetuating way, as those who are already
popular gain the ability to do things that get them more attention and
make them more popular. Such dynamics are readily observable today, as
blogs and other social media produce popular gatekeepers who are able to
determine who gets attention and who does not, in a way that is not
completely a function of who has money to spend. Organizing society
according to who has the most ‘likes’ on Facebook has certain drawbacks,
to say the least, even when dislodged from its capitalist integument.

But if it is not a vision of a perfect society, this version of
communism is at least a world in which conflict is no longer based on
the opposition between wage workers and capitalists, or on struggles
over scarce resources. It is a world in which not everything ultimately
comes down to money. A communist society would surely have hierarchies
of status – as have all human societies, and as does capitalism. But in
capitalism, all status hierarchies tend to be aligned, albeit
imperfectly, with one master status hierarchy: the accumulation of
capital and money. The ideal of a post-scarcity society is that various
kinds of esteem are independent, so that the esteem in which one is held
as a musician is independent of the regard one achieves as a political
activist, and one can’t use one kind of status to buy another. In a
sense, then, it is a misnomer to refer to this as an ‘egalitarian’
configuration, since it is not a world of no hierarchies but one of
*many* hierarchies, no one of which is superior to all the others.

#### Hierarchy and abundance: rentism

Given the technical premises of complete automation and free energy, the
Star Trek utopia of pure communism becomes a possibility, but hardly an
inevitability. The bourgeois elite of the present day does not merely
enjoy privileged access to scarce material goods, after all; they also
enjoy exalted status and social power over the working masses, which
should not be discounted as a source of capitalist motivation. Nobody
can actually spend a billion dollars on themselves, after all, and yet
there are hedge fund managers who make that much in a single year and
then come back for more. For such people, money is a source of power
over others, a status marker, and a way of keeping score – not really so
different from Doctorow’s whuffie, except that it is a form of status
that depends on the material deprivation of others. It is therefore to
be expected that even if labor were to become superfluous in production,
the ruling classes would endeavor to preserve a system based on money,
profit, and class power.

The embryonic form of class power in a post-scarcity economy can be
found in our systems of intellectual property law. While contemporary
defenders of intellectual property like to speak of it as though it is
broadly analogous to other kinds of property, it is actually based on a
quite different principle. As the economists Michele Boldrin and David
K. Levine observe, IP rights go beyond the traditional conception of
property. They do not merely ensure “your right to control your copy of
your idea”, in the way that they protect my right to control my shoes or
my house. Rather, they give rights-holders the ability to tell others
how to use copies of an idea that they ‘own’. As Boldrin and Levine say,
“This is not a right ordinarily or automatically granted to the owners
of other types of property. If I produce a cup of coffee, I have the
right to choose whether or not to sell it to you or drink it myself. But
my property right is not an automatic right both to sell you the cup of
coffee and to tell you how to drink it.”

The mutation of the property form, from real to intellectual, catalyzes
the transformation of society into something which is not recognizable
as *capitalism*, but is nevertheless just as unequal. Capitalism, at its
root, isn’t defined by the presence of capitalists, but by the existence
of *capital*, which in turn is inseparable from the process of commodity
production by means of wage labor, M-C-M’. When wage labor disappears,
the ruling class can continue to accumulate money only if they retain
the ability to appropriate a stream of rents, which arise from their
control of intellectual property. Thus emerges a *rentist*, rather than
capitalist society.

Suppose, for example, that all production is by means of Star Trek’s
replicator. In order to make money from selling replicated items, people
must somehow be prevented from just making whatever they want for free,
and this is the function of intellectual property. A replicator is only
available from a company that licenses you the right to use one, since
anyone who tried to give you a replicator or make one with their own
replicator would be violating the terms of their license. What’s more,
every time you make something with the replicator, you must pay a
licensing fee to whoever owns the rights to that particular thing. In
this world, if Star Trek’s Captain Jean-Luc Picard wanted to replicate
his beloved “tea, Earl Grey, hot”, he would have to pay the company that
has copyrighted the replicator pattern for hot Earl Grey tea.

This solves the problem of how to maintain for-profit enterprise, at
least on the surface. Anyone who tries to supply their needs from their
replicator without paying the copyright cartels would become an outlaw,
like today’s online file sharers. Despite its absurdity, this
arrangement would likely have advocates among some contemporary critics
of the Internet’s sharing culture; Jaron Lanier’s
*You**Are**Not**a**Gadget*, for instance, explicitly calls for the
imposition of “artificial scarcity” on digital content in order to
restore its value. The consequences of such arguments are already
apparent in the record industry’s lawsuits against hapless mp3
downloaders, and in the continual intensification of the surveillance
state under the guise of combating piracy. The extension of this regime
to the micro-fabrication of physical objects will only make the problem
worse. Once again, science fiction is enlightening, in this case the
work of Charles Stross. *Accelerando* shows us a future in which
copyright infringers are pursued by hitmen, while *Halting**State*
depicts furtive back alley “fabbers” running their 3-D printers one step
ahead of the law.

But an economy based on artificial scarcity is not only irrational, it
is also dysfunctional. If everyone is constantly being forced to pay out
money in licensing fees, then they need some way of earning money, and
this generates a new problem. The fundamental dilemma of rentism is the
problem of effective demand: that is, how to ensure that people are able
to earn enough money to be able to pay the licensing fees on which
private profit depends. Of course, this isn’t so different from the
problem that confronted industrial capitalism, but it becomes more
severe as human labor is increasingly squeezed out of the system, and
human beings become superfluous as elements of production, even as they
remain necessary as consumers. So what kind of jobs would still exist in
this economy?

Some people would still be needed to dream up new things to be
replicated, and so there will remain a place for a small “creative
class” of designers and artists. And as their creations accumulate, the
number of things that can be replicated will soon vastly outstrip the
available time and money to enjoy them. The biggest threat to any given
company’s profits will not be the cost of labor or raw materials – both
minimal or nonexistent – but rather the prospect that the licenses they
own will lose out in popularity to those of competitors. Marketing and
advertising, then, will continue to employ significant numbers.
Alongside the marketers, there will also be an army of lawyers, as
today’s litigation over patent and copyright infringement swells to
encompass every aspect of economic activity. And finally, as in any
hierarchical society, there must be an apparatus of repression to keep
the poor and powerless from taking a share back from the rich and
powerful. Enforcing draconion intellectual property law will require
large battalions of what Samuel Bowles and Arjun Jayadev call “guard
labor”: “The efforts of the monitors, guards, and military personnel . .
. directed not toward production, but toward the enforcement of claims
arising from exchanges and the pursuit or prevention of unilateral
transfers of property ownership.”

Nevertheless, maintaining full employment in a rentist economy will be a
constant struggle. It is unlikely that the four areas just described can
fully replace all the jobs lost to automation. What’s more, these jobs
are themselves subject to labor-saving innovations. Marketing can be
done with data mining and algorithms; much of the routine business of
lawyering can be replaced with software; guard labor can be performed by
surveillance drones rather than human police. Even some of the work of
product invention could one day be given to computers that possess some
rudimentary artificial creative intelligence.

And if automation fails, the rentist elite can colonize our leisure time
in order to extract free labor. Facebook already relies on its users to
create content for free, and the recent fad for “gamification” suggests
that corporations are very interested in finding ways to turn the work
of their employees into activities that people will find pleasurable,
and will thus do for free on their own time. The computer scientist Luis
von Ahn, for example, has specialized in developing ‘games with a
purpose’, applications that present themselves to end users as enjoyable
diversions while also performing a useful computational task. One of von
Ahn’s games asked users to identify objects in photos, and the data was
then fed back into a database that was used for searching images. This
line of research evokes the world of Orson Scott Card’s novel
*Ender’s**Game*, in which children remotely fight an interstellar war
through what they think are video games.

All of this means that the society of rentism would probably be subject
to a persistent trend toward under-employment, which the ruling class
would have to find some way to counter in order to hold the system
together. This entails realizing a vision that the late André Gorz had
of post-industrial society: “the distribution of means of payment must
correspond to the volume of wealth socially produced and not to the
volume of work performed.” This might involve taxing the profits of
profitable firms and redistributing the money back to consumers –
possibly as a no-strings-attached guaranteed income, and possibly in
return for performing some kind of meaningless make-work. But even if
redistribution is desirable from the standpoint of the class as a whole,
a collective action problem arises; any individual company or rich
person will be tempted to free-ride on the payments of others, and will
therefore resist efforts to impose a redistributive tax. The government
could also simply print money to give to the working class, but the
resulting inflation would just be an indirect form of redistribution and
would also be resisted. Finally, there is the option of funding
consumption through consumer indebtedness – but readers in the early
twenty-first century presumably do not need to be reminded of the
limitations inherent in that solution.

Given all these troubles, one might ask why the rentier class would
bother trying to extract profits from people, since they could just
replicate whatever they want anyway. What keeps society from simply
dissolving into the communist scenario from the previous section? It
might be that nobody would hold enough licenses to provide for *all* of
their needs, so everyone needs revenue to pay their own licensing costs.
You might own the replicator pattern for an apple, but just being able
to make apples isn’t enough to survive. In this reading, the rentier
class are just those who own enough licenses to cover all of their own
license fees.

Or perhaps, as noted at the outset, the ruling class would guard their
privileged position in order to protect the power over others granted to
those at the top of a class-divided society. This suggests another
solution to rentism’s underemployment problem: hiring people to perform
personal services might become a status marker, even if automation makes
it strictly speaking unnecessary. The much-heralded rise of the service
economy would evolve into a futuristic version of nineteenth century
England or parts of India today, where the elite can afford to hire huge
numbers of servants.

But this society can persist only so long as most people accept the
legitimacy of its governing hierarchy. Perhaps the power of ideology
would be strong enough to induce people to accept the state of affairs
described here. Or perhaps people would start to ask why the wealth of
knowledge and culture was being enclosed within restrictive laws, when,
to use a recently popular slogan, “another world is possible” beyond the
regime of artificial scarcity.

#### Egalitarianism and scarcity: socialism

We have seen that the combination of automated production and bounteous
resources gives us either the pure utopia of communism or the absurdist
dystopia of rentism; but what if energy and resources remain scarce? In
that case, we arrive in a world characterized simultaneously by
abundance and scarcity, in which the liberation of production occurs
alongside an intensified planning and management of the inputs to that
production. The need to control labor still disappears, but the need to
manage scarcity remains.

Scarcity in the physical inputs to production must be understood to
encompass far more than particular commodities like oil or iron ore –
capitalism’s malign effect on the environment threatens to do permanent
damage to the climates and ecosystems on which much of our present
economy depends. Climate change has already begun to play havoc with the
world’s food system, and future generations may look back on the variety
of foodstuffs available today as an unsustainable golden age. (Earlier
generations of science fiction writers sometimes imagined that we would
one day choose to consume all our nutrition in the form of a flavorless
pill; we may yet do so by necessity.) And under the more severe
projections, many areas that are now densely populated may become
uninhabitable, imposing severe relocation and reconstruction costs on
our descendants.

Our third future, then, is one in which nobody needs to perform labor,
and yet people are not free to consume as much as they like. Some kind
of government is required, and pure communism is excluded as a
possibility; what we get instead is a version of socialism, and some
form of economic planning. In contrast to the plans of the twentieth
century, however, those of the resource-constrained future are mostly
concerned with managing *consumption*, rather than production. That is,
we still assume the replicator; the task is to manage the inputs that
feed it.

This might seem less than promising. Consumption, after all, was
precisely the area in which Soviet-style planning was found to be most
deficient. A society that can arm itself for war with the Nazis, but is
then subject to endless shortages and bread lines, is hardly an
inspiring template. But the real lesson of the USSR and its imitators is
that planning’s time had not yet come – and when it did begin to come,
the bureaucratic sclerosis and political shortcomings of the Communist
system proved unable to accommodate it. In the 1950s and 1960s, Soviet
economists tried heroically to reconstruct their economy into a more
workable form – one of the leading figures in this effort was the Nobel
prize-winner Leonid Kantorovich, whose story is told in fictional form
in Francis Spufford’s recent book *Red**Plenty*. The effort ran aground
not because planning was impossible in principle, but because it was
[technically and politically
impossible](http://21stcenturysocialism.com/article/review_red_plenty_by_francis_spufford_01992.html)
in the USSR of that time. Technically, because sufficient computing
power was not yet available, and politically because the Soviet
bureaucratic elite was unwilling to part with the power and privilege
granted to them under the existing system.

But the efforts of Kantorovich, and of contemporary theorists of
planning such as [Paul Cockshott and Allin
Cottrell](http://ricardo.ecn.wfu.edu/%7Ecottrell/socialism_book/),
suggest that some form of efficient and democratic planning is possible.
And it will be necessary in a world of scarce resources: while private
capitalist production has been very successful at incentivizing
labor-saving technological innovation, it has proven to be terrible at
conserving the environment or rationing scarce resources. Even in a
post-capitalist, post-work world, some kind of coordination is needed to
ensure that individuals do not treat the Earth in a way that is, in the
aggregate, unsustainable. What is needed, as [Michael Löwy has
said](http://socialistregister.com/index.php/srv/article/view/5869), is
some kind of “global democratic planning” rooted in pluralistic,
democratic debate rather than rule by bureaucrats.

A distinction should be made, however, between democratic planning and a
completely non-market economy. A socialist economy could employ rational
planning while still featuring market exchange of some sort, along with
money and prices. This, in fact, was one of Kantorovich’s insights;
rather than do away with price signals, he wanted to make prices into
mechanisms for making planned production targets into economic
realities. Current attempts to put a price on carbon emissions through
cap-and-trade schemes point in this direction: while they use the market
as a coordinating mechanism, they are also a form of planning, since the
key step is the non-market decision about what level of carbon emissions
is acceptable. This approach could look quite different than it does
today, if generalized and implemented without capitalist property
relations and wealth inequalities.

Suppose that everyone received a wage, not as a return to labor but as a
human right. The wage would not buy the products of others’ labor, but
rather the right to use up a certain quantity of energy and resources as
one went about using the replicators. Markets might develop insofar as
people chose to trade one type of consumption permit for another, but
this would be what the sociologist Erik Olin Wright calls “capitalism
between consenting adults”, rather than the involuntary participation in
wage labor driven by the threat of starvation.

Given the need to determine and target stable levels of consumption –
and thus set prices – the state can’t quite wither away, as it does
under the communist scenario. And where there is scarcity, there will
surely be political conflict, even if this is no longer a *class*
conflict. Conflicts between locales, between generations, between those
who are more concerned with the long-term health of the environment and
those who prefer more material consumption in the short run – none of
these will be easy to solve. But we will at least have arrived on the
other side of capitalism as a democratic society, and more or less in
one piece.

#### Hierarchy and scarcity: exterminism

But if we do not arrive as equals, and environmental limits continue to
press against us, we come to the fourth and most disturbing of our
possible futures. In a way, it resembles the communism that we began
with – but it is a communism for the few.

A paradoxical truth about that global elite we have learned to call the
“one percent” is that, while they are defined by their control of a huge
swathe of the world’s monetary wealth, they are at the same time the
fragment of humanity whose daily lives are *least* dominated by money.
As Charles Stross [has
written](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2011/10/a-cultural-experiment.html),
the very richest inhabit an existence in which most worldly goods are,
in effect, free. That is, their wealth is so great relative to the cost
of food, housing, travel, and other amenities that they rarely have to
consider the cost of anything. Whatever they want, they can have.

Which is to say that for the very rich, the world is already something
like the communism described earlier. The difference, of course, is that
their post-scarcity condition is made possible not just by machines but
by the labor of the global working class. But an optimistic view of
future developments – the future I have described as communism – is that
we will eventually come to a state in which we are all, in some sense,
the one percent. As William Gibson famously remarked, “the future is
already here; it’s just unevenly distributed.”

But what if resources and energy are simply too scarce to allow everyone
to enjoy the material standard of living of today’s rich? What if we
arrive in a future that no longer requires the mass proletariat’s labor
in production, but is unable to provide everyone with an arbitrarily
high standard of consumption? If we arrive in that world as an
egalitarian society, than the answer is the socialist regime of shared
conservation described in the previous section. But if, instead, we
remain a society polarized between a privileged elite and a downtrodden
mass, then the most plausible trajectory leads to something much darker;
I will call it by the term that E.P. Thompson used to describe a
different dystopia, during the peak of the cold war: *exterminism*.

The great danger posed by the automation of production, in the context
of a world of hierarchy and scarce resources, is that it makes the great
mass of people superfluous from the standpoint of the ruling elite. This
is in contrast to capitalism, where the antagonism between capital and
labor was characterized by both a clash of interests and a relationship
of mutual dependence: the workers depend on capitalists as long as they
don’t control the means of production themselves, while the capitalists
need workers to run their factories and shops. It is as the lyrics of
“Solidarity Forever” had it: “They have taken untold millions that they
never toiled to earn/But without our brain and muscle not a single wheel
can turn.” With the rise of the robots, the second line ceases to hold.

The existence of an impoverished, economically superfluous rabble poses
a great danger to the ruling class, which will naturally fear imminent
expropriation; confronted with this threat, several courses of action
present themselves. The masses can be bought off with some degree of
redistribution of resources, as the rich share out their wealth in the
form of social welfare programs, at least if resource constraints aren’t
too binding. But in addition to potentially reintroducing scarcity into
the lives of the rich, this solution is liable to lead to an ever-rising
tide of demands on the part of the masses, thus raising the specter of
expropriation once again. This is essentially what happened at the high
tide of the welfare state, when bosses began to fear that both profits
and control over the workplace were slipping out of their hands.

If buying off the angry mob isn’t a sustainable strategy, another option
is simply to run away and hide from them. This is the trajectory of what
the sociologist Bryan Turner calls “[enclave
society”](http://est.sagepub.com/content/10/2/287.abstract), an order in
which “governments and other agencies seek to regulate spaces and, where
necessary, to immobilize flows of people, goods and services” by means
of “enclosure, bureaucratic barriers, legal exclusions and
registrations.” Gated communities, private islands, ghettos, prisons,
terrorism paranoia, biological quarantines; together, these amount to an
inverted global gulag, where the rich live in tiny islands of wealth
strewn around an ocean of misery. In *Tropic**of**Chaos*, Christian
Parenti makes the case that we are already constructing this new order,
as climate change brings about what he calls the “catastrophic
convergence” of ecological disruption, economic inequality, and state
failure. The legacy of colonialism and neoliberalism is that the rich
countries, along with the elites of the poorer ones, have facilitated a
disintegration into anarchic violence, as various tribal and political
factions fight over the diminishing bounty of damaged ecosystems. Faced
with this bleak reality, many of the rich – which, in global terms,
includes many workers in the rich countries as well – have resigned
themselves to barricading themselves into their fortresses, to be
protected by unmanned drones and private military contractors. Guard
labor, which we encountered in the rentist society, reappears in an even
more malevolent form, as a lucky few are employed as enforcers and
protectors for the rich.

But this too, is an unstable equilibrium, for the same basic reason that
buying off the masses is. So long as the immiserated hordes exist, there
is the danger that it may one day become impossible to hold them at bay.
Once mass labor has been rendered superfluous, a final solution lurks:
the genocidal war of the rich against the poor. Many have called the
recent Justin Timberlake vehicle, *In**Time*, [a Marxist
film](http://www.thenation.com/article/164463/times-squared), but it is
more precisely a parable of the road to exterminism. In the movie, a
tiny ruling class literally lives forever in their gated enclaves due to
genetic technology, while everyone else is programmed to die at 25
unless they can beg, borrow or steal more time. The only thing saving
the workers is that the rich still have some need for their labor; when
that need expires, so presumably will the working class itself.

Hence exterminism, as a description of this type of society. Such a
genocidal telos may seem like an outlandish, comic book villain level of
barbarism; perhaps it is unreasonable to think that a world scarred by
the holocausts of the twentieth century could again sink to such
depravity. Then again, the United States is already a country where a
serious candidate for the Presidency revels in executing the innocent,
while the sitting Commander in Chief casually orders the assassination
of American citizens without even the pretense of due process, to
widespread liberal applause.

* * * * *

These four visions are abstracted ideal types, Platonic essences of a
society. They leave out many of the messy details of history, and they
ignore the reality that scarcity-abundance and equality-hierarchy are
not simple dichotomies but rather scales with many possible in-between
points. But my inspiration, in drawing these simplified portraits, was
the model of a purely capitalist society that Marx pursued in *Capital*:
an ideal which can never be perfectly reflected in the complex
assemblages of real economic history, but which illuminates unique and
foundational elements of a particular social order. The socialisms and
barbarisms described here should be thought of as roads humanity might
travel down, even if they are destinations we will never reach. With
some knowledge of what lies at the end of each road, perhaps we will be
better able to avoid setting off in the wrong direction.

![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/end_icon.png)
\
 If you like this article, please
[subscribe](http://store.jacobinmag.com/category/subscriptions). \
 \

Peter Frase is an editor at *Jacobin*and a Ph.D. student in sociology at
the [CUNY Graduate Center](http://web.gc.cuny.edu/sociology/).

Featured
--------

#### [A Petrodollar and a Dream](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/01/a-petrodollar-and-a-dream/)

[Adam
Hanieh](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/adam-hanieh/ "Posts by Adam Hanieh")

#### [Alive in the Sunshine](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/01/alive-in-the-sunshine/)

[Alyssa
Battistoni](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/alyssa-battistoni/ "Posts by Alyssa Battistoni")

#### [There’s a Gene for That](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/01/theres-a-gene-for-that/)

[Pankaj
Mehta](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/pankaj-mehta/ "Posts by Pankaj Mehta")

#### [In the Name of Love](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/01/in-the-name-of-love/)

[Miya
Tokumitsu](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/miya-tokumitsu/ "Posts by Miya Tokumitsu")

#### [Our Plans for 2014: Jacobin Needs Your Help](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2013/12/our-plans-for-2014-support-jacobin-today/)

[Bhaskar
Sunkara](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/bhaskar/ "Posts by Bhaskar Sunkara")

[](http://www.facebook.com/jacobinmag) [](http://twitter.com/jacobinmag)

Follow us

[Current Issue](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/alive-in-the-sunshine)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Alive in the Sunshine](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/alive-in-the-sunshine)

[![issue\_13](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/issue_13.png)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/alive-in-the-sunshine)
Buy [print](http://store.jacobinmag.com/product/) |
[electronic](http://store.jacobinmag.com/product/-digital)

[![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Jacobin85w-e1394716839910.jpg)](http://newleftreview.org/?utm_source=jacobin&utm_medium=website&utm_content=half-page&utm_campaign=NLR85)

[Donate](/donate/)
------------------

1.

We don't understand libel law.

2.

Our lawyers don't either.

3.

We'd like to trade in PBR for champagne.

4.

We won't send you a tote bag.

5.

We will send you a holiday card.

6.

And possibly some baked goods.

7.

We're an independent leftist magazine.

8.

In color.

9.

With pretty pictures.

10.

This is an excellent way to launder money.

[](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-admin/)

### About

*Jacobin* is a magazine of culture and polemic published quarterly out
of New York City. \
 \
 1789-2013 © Jacobin Press

### The Magazine

[Home](https://www.jacobinmag.com/)

[About](https://www.jacobinmag.com/about)

[Current Issue](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/alive-in-the-sunshine)

[All Issues](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/)

[Bookmarx](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/bookmarx)

### Blogs

[News and
Announcements](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/news-and-announcements)

[St. Monday](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/st-monday)

[The Vulgar
Empiricist](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/vulgar-empiricist)

[Zombie Lenin](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/zombie-lenin)

### Support Us

[Contact](https://www.jacobinmag.com/contact)

[Subscribe](https://www.jacobinmag.com/subscribe)

[Donate](https://www.jacobinmag.com/donate)

[Buy Swag](https://www.jacobinmag.com/store/)

[Advertise](https://www.jacobinmag.com/advertise)

designed by [Position Studios](http://positionstudios.com)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://www.jacobinmag.com/2011/12/four-futures/
