-   [Table of Contents](/)
-   [Next Chapter](rapid-development.html)

##### Chapter 16

Web technology fundamentals
===========================

Web technologies are in a constant state of flux. It’s impossible to
predict which will fail, which will shine brightly then quickly fade
away, and which have real longevity. Rapid innovation is what makes web
app development so exciting, but shiny new things shouldn’t be pursued
without a solid understanding of the underlying web platform.

![img-16\_1](img-16_1.jpg)

The ups and downs of web technologies, by Google search volume

In the web developer job interviews I conducted over the past ten years,
interviewees could usually easily explain how to create the latest
interactive interfaces, but often couldn’t describe the basics of
character encoding or HTTP. These topics certainly aren’t as sexy as
modern CSS and HTML canvas animations, but they are essential knowledge
for those wishing to create a stable, high performance web app.

Web architecture primer
-----------------------

Let’s start with DNS (domain name system) and HTTP (hypertext transfer
protocol). These are the underlying systems that web browsers use to
send and fetch data to and from web apps. Familiarity with these
protocols is essential for later discussions on application programming
interfaces (APIs), performance and security.

### DNS

When you type an address into a web browser or follow a link, the
browser first has to identify which computer server in the world to ask
for the content. Although web addresses use domain names like
fivesimplesteps.com to make them easier for people to remember them,
computers use unique numbers to identify each other^[1](#fn1)^.

To convert names to numbers, the browser queries a series of DNS
servers, which are distributed directories of names and numbers for all
web servers. To speed up this process, the lookups are cached at a
number of locations: your internet service provider (ISP) will hold a
cache, your operating system may hold a cache and even your web browser
software will hold a short lifetime cache.

![img-16\_2](img-16_2.jpg)

Google Chrome’s integrated DNS cache

### HTTP requests

Once your browser has identified the correct number associated with the
domain name, it connects to the server with the equivalent of, “Hello,
can I ask you something?” The connection is agreed and your browser
sends a message to request the content. As a single web server can host
thousands of websites, the message has to be specific about the content
that it is looking for.

Your browser will add supplementary information to the request message,
much of which is designed to improve the speed and format of the
returned content. For example, it might include data about the browser’s
compression capabilities and your preferred language.

An HTTP request message for the BBC technology news page will look
similar to the example below. Each separate line of the message is known
as an HTTP header.

`         GET /news/technology/ HTTP/1.1         Host: www.bbc.co.uk         User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; U; Intel Mac OS X 10.6; en-US; rv:1.9.2.13) […]         Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8         Accept-Language: en-us,en;q=0.5         Accept-Encoding: gzip,deflate         Accept-Charset: ISO-8859-1,utf-8;q=0.7,*;q=0.7         Keep-Alive: 115         Connection: keep-alive     `

The first line states the method of request (GET), the local path to the
requested resource, and the version of HTTP used. GET is the most common
HTTP method and asks the server to return the content found at the
specified location. POST is another common method, which sends data
collected in the browser to the server.

The *Host* header field tells the server which of the potentially
thousands of locally hosted websites to check for the resource, and the
*User-Agent* describes the browser making the request.

The various Accept fields define preferences for the returned content.
Rather than waste time with numerous back and forth messages (“Can I
have it in this format? No? OK, how about this format?”), Accept header
fields can specify multiple preferences separated by commas. Each can be
assigned a degree of preference defined by a quality score q of between
0 and 1. If a q value isn’t specified it is assumed to be 1. In the
example above, the browser is asking for HTML or XHTML with equal full
preference (q=1), followed by XML (0.9), and finally any format (0.8).

The *Keep-Alive* and *Connection* fields ask the web server to
temporarily create a persistent connection. This speeds up requests that
immediately follow this request, as they don’t need to each perform the
initial connection handshake of “Hello, can I ask you something?” An
added benefit of persistence is that the server can stream back the
content in chunks over the same connection, rather than waiting for it
all to be ready for a single response.

### HTTP responses

The response from the server to the browser also contains an HTTP
message, prefixed to the requested content.

`         HTTP/1.1 200 OK         Date: Sun, 20 Feb 2011 03:49:19 GMT         Server: Apache         Set-Cookie: BBC-UID=d4fd96e01cf7083; expires=Mon, 20-Feb-12 07:49:32 GMT;         path=/;domain=bbc.co.uk;         Cache-Control: max-age=0         Expires: Sun, 20 Feb 2011 03:49:19 GMT         Keep-Alive: timeout=10, max=796         Transfer-Encoding: chunked         Content-Type: text/html         Connection: keep-alive                  125         <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML+RDFa 1.0//EN"         [Remainder of HTML…]     `

The opening *status line* contains the HTTP version number, a numeric
response code and a textual description of the response code. The web
browser is designed to recognise the numeric response code and proceed
accordingly. Common response codes include:

-   **200:** *OK*\
     Successful request
-   **301:** *Moved Permanently*\
     The requested content has been moved permanently to a new given
    location. This and all future requests should be redirected to the
    new address.
-   **302:** *Found*\
     The requested content has been moved temporarily to a given
    address. Future requests should use the original location.
-   **404:** *Not Found*\
     The server cannot find the resource at the requested location.
-   **500:** *Internal Server Error*\
     A generic error message, shown when an unexpected condition
    prevents the request from being fulfilled.

The browser doesn’t understand the textual part of the line. It can be
used by the web server to elaborate on a response, and is intended for
users or developers who read the HTTP headers. For example, a 200 OK
response could also be sent as *200 Page Found*.

The *Keep-Alive* and *Connection* header fields establish rules for the
persistent connection that the browser requested. In the example, the
Keep-Alive field tells the browser that the server will hold the
connection open for up to 10 seconds in anticipation of the next
request. It also specifies that up to 796 additional requests can be
made on the connection.

The *Cache-Control* and *Expires* fields control caching of the returned
content, which might occur within the browser or at any number of
intermediate proxy servers that exist between the web server and the
user’s computer. In the example, the immediate expiry date and cache age
of zero inform the browser that it should check for a new copy of the
page before using a locally cached version on subsequent requests.

The *Transfer-Encoding* value of *chunked* notifies the browser that the
content will be transferred in pieces. The content begins after the
final header field and is separated from the HTTP header by two
newlines. Each chunk of content starts with a hexadecimal value of its
size expressed in octets (units of 8 bits): 125 in the example.

### Statelessness and cookies

HTTP is *stateless*. This means that multiple requests from the browser
to the server are independent of one another, and the server has no
memory of requests from one to the next. But most web apps need to track
state to allow users to remain logged in across requests and to
personalise pages across sessions.

HTTP cookies are the most common solution to this problem. A cookie is a
small text file that the browser stores on your computer. It contains a
name and a value associated with a specific website (for example, a name
of *age* and a value of *43*). Cookies can be temporary or can persist
for years.

Each website domain can create 20 cookies of up to 4kb each. Cookies are
created and read through HTTP headers. In the BBC HTTP response, the
*Set-Cookie* header field demonstrates the creation of a cookie.

`Set-Cookie: BBC-UID=d4fd96e01cf7083; expires=Mon, 20-Feb-12 07:49:32 GMT;     path=/;domain=bbc.co.uk;`

In this example, the web server asks the browser to create a cookie with
the name *BBC-UID* and a value of *d4fd96e01cf7083*. The cookie is valid
for all domains that end with bbc.co.uk and all directories. The expiry
date for the cookie has been set to a year after the time of the
response.

Subsequent HTTP requests from the browser that match the valid domain
and path will include the cookie as an HTTP header, which the server can
read:

`Cookie: BBC-UID=d4fd96e01cf7083`

What does this random-looking BBC cookie mean?

Although cookies enable real user data to be stored and read across
requests, in practice they are usually used to store unique identifiers
for users rather than actual user data. The small size of cookies, the
additional bandwidth overhead in HTTP headers and the security risk of
storing sensitive data in plain text cookie files all combine to make
unique identifiers a better solution for cookie data. With this model,
user data is stored securely on the server and associated with a short
unique identifier; it is the identifier that is subsequently used in
cookies for persistence.

If the expiry date for a cookie isn’t set it becomes a *session cookie*
and is deleted when the user ends their current session on the website.
Due to privacy concerns, some users may configure their web browser to
allow session cookies but disallow standard *persistent* cookies.

Content type
------------

Your browser now has the content it requested, thanks to the HTTP
response from the server. Before the content can be processed and
displayed though, the browser needs to determine what type of content it
is: an image, PDF file, webpage, or something else.

One way a browser can achieve this is through content sniffing. The
browser examines the first few bytes (and sometimes more) of the content
to see if it recognises a pattern in the data, such as a PDF or JPG
header. Apart from the accuracy and performance issues that this may
introduce, it can also have security implications^[2](#fn2)^.

The better solution is for the server to tell the browser what the
content is with an HTTP header field in the response, such as the one in
the BBC example:

`Content-Type: text/html`

The *Content-Type* field specifies the internet media type^[3](#fn3)^ of
the content. Media types can identify most common file
formats^[4](#fn4)^, including videos, images, webpages, spreadsheets and
audio files. The web server is normally configured to send the correct
content type header field based on the file extension. If your app
delivers any special data or file formats, ensure that the relevant
media types are configured on the web server.

Character encoding and Unicode
------------------------------

At this point, images and other binary files can be correctly
interpreted and displayed by the browser. However, HTML pages and other
text-based content are still unreadable by the browser due to the
different *character encodings* that can be used.

Like all other files, text files are streams of bytes of data. In an
image file, a set of bytes might define the colour of a single pixel. In
a text file, a set of bytes might define a single character, perhaps a
Japanese kanji character, the uppercase letter B of the Latin alphabet,
or a semicolon. How exactly do the bytes map to characters? The answer
is: it depends on the character encoding. Until the browser knows what
the character encoding is, it doesn’t know how to create characters from
the bytes.

In the early days of computing most text was stored in ASCII encoding,
which can represent the basic Latin alphabet with only seven bits per
character. Additional encodings followed, each designed to handle a
specific set of characters: Windows-1251 for the Cyrillic alphabet, ISO
8859-8 for Hebrew, among many others.

Each encoding standard stored one character in one 8-bit byte. ISO
8859-1, also referred to as Latin-1, became a popular encoding that
remains widely in use. It uses the eighth bit to extend ASCII with
accents and currency symbols found in many of the western European
languages. Thanks in part to the internet, this system became
increasingly unworkable as multiple diverse alphabets were required in a
single file. The sensible way to achieve this was to start using more
than eight bits to represent a single character.

*Unicode* was born. Rather than defining a specific encoding, Unicode
sets out over one million *code points*, which are numbers that
represent characters. For example, the Greek capital letter Sigma Σ is
Unicode number 931, the Arabic letter Yeh ي is 1610, and the dingbat
envelope character ✉ is code point 9993.

Multiple encodings of Unicode exist that define how to store the code
point numbers in bytes of data. UTF-8 and UTF-16 are two such encodings.
Both can encode the full range of more than one million characters and
both use a variable number of bytes per character. The main practical
difference between the two is that UTF-8 uses between one and four bytes
per character, whereas UTF-16 uses two or four bytes per character.

Most importantly, because the first 128 characters defined by Unicode
exactly match those of ASCII, UTF-8 is backwards compatible with ASCII,
as it only uses one byte per character for these lower code points. This
is not so for UTF-16, which uses a minimum of two bytes per character
and therefore uses twice as many bytes to store standard ASCII
characters.

A web server can notify a browser of the character encoding through an
additional parameter in the Content-Type HTTP header field:

`Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8`

This allows the browser to decode the content immediately.
Alternatively, the character encoding can be specified inside the HTML
`<head>` element with an HTTP equivalent `<meta>` tag:

`<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />`

or the HTML5 version:

`<meta charset="utf-8">`

This is useful if you don’t have access to the web server to configure
the correct HTTP header. The browser will usually be able to read this
directive no matter what the encoding is, as most encodings extend
ASCII, which are the only characters used in the `<meta>` tag. However,
the browser may consequently have to reparse the document a second time
with the correct encoding. For this reason, the HTTP header field is the
preferred option, but if you do use the `<meta>` tag ensure that it is
the first element inside the `<head>` element so that the browser reads
it as soon as possible.

As with media types, omission of the character encoding is not
recommended and can be a security risk.

Document object model (DOM)
---------------------------

With knowledge of the encoding, the browser can convert the incoming
bytes into the characters of the webpage. It runs a *parser* through the
content which recognises HTML elements and converts them into a
tree-like hierarchy of nodes in memory called the document object
model^[5](#fn5)^ (DOM) or content tree.

DOM nodes for HTML elements become *element nodes*, text strings within
tags are *text nodes*, and attributes of an element are converted to
*attribute nodes*.

![img-16\_3](img-16_3.jpg)

Apart from structure, the DOM defines a standard interface (API) that
scripts can use to access, modify and move between nodes, though this
interface is implemented with varying degrees of completeness across
different browsers.

When the HTML parser reaches a reference to an external resource like an
`<img>`, it requests the file from the web server even if it is still
downloading the remainder of the HTML content. Most modern browsers
allow six simultaneous requests per host and over thirty requests in
total at any one time.

Style sheets and JavaScript files are notable exceptions to this rule.
When the parser encounters an external style sheet file, it may block
further downloads until the style sheet is downloaded, although this is
now rare in modern browsers.

JavaScript files are a little more problematic. At the time of writing,
Internet Explorer 9 and earlier block the download of subsequent image
files until a JavaScript file is downloaded and executed^[6](#fn6)^.
What’s more, all browsers will stop any rendering of the page until the
JavaScript is processed, in case the code makes a change to the DOM.
We’ll discuss this in more detail shortly.

If your JavaScript doesn’t modify the DOM, you can add an async or defer
attribute or both to your `<script>` elements to prevent blocking. As
these attributes aren’t currently supported in all popular browsers, the
best cross-browser advice at the moment is to:

-   Include style sheets before scripts so that they can begin to
    download before any JavaScript blocks.
-   Place scripts at the end of the HTML, just before the `</body>`, so
    that they don’t block downloads or rendering.
-   Force scripts to download asynchronously using one of many
    workarounds; search the web for *loading scripts without blocking*
    to find a variety of options.

The render tree and layout
--------------------------

After the style sheets have downloaded, the browser starts to build a
second tree of nodes, even if the DOM is not yet complete. The render
tree is a visual representation of the DOM with a node for each visual
element^[7](#fn7)^. Style data is combined from external style sheets,
inline styles, outdated HTML attributes (such as `bgcolor`) and the
browser’s default style sheet.

Render tree nodes are rectangles whose structure is defined by the *CSS
box model* with content, padding, borders, margins and position:

![img-16\_4](img-16_4.jpg)

The CSS Box Model

Render nodes are initially created without the geometric properties of
position and size. These are established in a subsequent *layout*
process that iterates through the render tree and uses the CSS visual
flow model^[8](#fn8)^ to position and size each node. When the layout is
complete the browser finally draws the nodes to screen with a *paint*
process.

If a geometric change is made to a DOM element post-layout, by
JavaScript for instance, its relevant part of the render tree is
invalidated, rebuilt, reflowed and repainted. Conversely, changes to
non-geometric DOM node properties such as background colour do not
trigger a reflow and are, therefore, faster.

\*Layout rendering is the biggest difference between the modes, but
there are also some minor non-layout differences too, such as HTML
parsing.

Historically, some browsers didn’t fully conform to the CSS
specification for the layout process, causing inconsistency in HTML
layout between browsers. In an effort to fix the situation while
providing backwards compatibility, this gave way to three layout modes:
*standards*, *quirks* and *almost standards*\* (which is identical to
standards mode except for the layout of images inside table cells).

Unless your app is specifically designed for an environment that
exclusively uses old web browsers, you should trigger the browser into
standards mode by including a valid `DOCTYPE` at the start of the HTML:

`<!DOCTYPE html>`

*HTML 5, but backwards compatible with most popular web browsers, down
to IE6*

`<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/strict.dtd">`

*HTML 4 Strict*

If necessary, use *conditional comments*^[9](#fn9)^ to resolve layout
issues in older versions of Internet Explorer, the main quirks mode
villain:

`     <!--[if lte IE 6]>     Include special CSS or other quirk fixes here     <![endif]-->     `

JavaScript and the browser object model
---------------------------------------

Most web apps need to modify the DOM to deliver interactive content
without the cost of a new page request. The DOM provides an API for this
purpose but it isn’t a programming language. Instead, client-side
scripts are written in JavaScript, which interfaces with the DOM API.
The DOM is separate from the JavaScript engine in a web browser and
consequently there is some overhead for each JavaScript request to the
DOM.

As far as JavaScript sees the world, the DOM is part of the larger
*browser object model* (BOM), which contains several sets of data about
the browser. Unlike the DOM, the BOM is not an agreed industry standard
and it exhibits greater discrepancy between browser vendors.

The BOM is represented in JavaScript by the `window` object and
typically contains the `navigator`, `frames`, `location`, `history`,
`screen` and `document` (DOM) objects. The global `window` object is the
default context of JavaScript, which means that it is the default
location to store variables and functions.

Two key security policies limit JavaScript’s access to the browser.
Firstly, the JavaScript *sandbox* restricts functionality to the scope
of the web, to prevent scripts from opening or deleting files on the
user’s local operating system. Secondly, the *same* origin policy
prevents communication between scripts on different domains or
protocols: that is, between dissimilar pages or third-party embedded
frames. A notable exception is that scripts included from other hosts
behave as if they originate on the main page host. This exception allows
third-party widgets to modify the DOM if they are included within a
`<script>` element.

Ajax
----

We’ve seen that client-side JavaScript code can interface with the DOM
inside the browser to modify the webpage without a page refresh, but
what if it needs to modify part of the page with additional data from
the web server?

This is where Ajax comes in. The term originates^[10](#fn10)^ from a
contraction of asynchronous JavaScript and XML, though in modern usage
it requires neither asynchronicity nor XML, and is used as a catch-all
term for the various technologies and methods that enable communication
between JavaScript and a web server.

The heart of most Ajax is the XMLHttpRequest API inside JavaScript. This
feature enables JavaScript code to send invisible, customisable HTTP
requests to the web server without altering the current page, and the
asynchronous nature of JavaScript and XMLHttpRequest (XHR) allows other
processing to continue while the web server responds. If the response is
chunked into pieces, the XHR can trigger multiple responses in the
JavaScript code to process the content as it is received. It’s worth
noting that, as with full page requests, the browser may cache the data
returned from XHR GET requests, depending on the HTTP header returned.

XML data is neither particularly lightweight nor quick to process. It is
now common practice to use the alternative JSON (JavaScript object
notation) data format for Ajax communication, which is smaller to
transmit and faster to process in JavaScript. Most modern web browsers
can natively parse JSON data into JavaScript objects, and all popular
server-side technologies offer JSON libraries.

Alternatively, an XHR response may contain a section of ready-made HTML.
This may be larger than an equivalent JSON response but it reduces
client-side processing and can be inserted directly into the DOM.

XHR is restricted by the same origin policy and cannot communicate with
a server on a different domain. The restriction is removed if the server
includes an explicit instruction to allow cross-domain requests for a
resource:

`Access-Control-Allow-Origin: http://fivesimplesteps.com`

*Allows cross-domain requests to the resource from fivesimplesteps.com*

This header is supported in most modern browsers: IE8+, Firefox 3.5+,
Safari 4+ and Chrome. Cross-domain Ajax requests in older browsers
require workarounds, of which JSONP^[11](#fn11)^ is the most popular
option, albeit the most convoluted.

JSONP
-----

The JSONP technique (JSON with padding) uses JavaScript to dynamically
insert a `<script>` element into the page, the source of which is loaded
from the third-party domain.

`         <script src="http://www.anotherdomain.com/getjsondata?function=responseFunction">         </script>     `

This is valid because, as we noted earlier, scripts loaded into the page
don’t face the same cross-domain restrictions. Still, so far the
returned data (typically JSON) will simply be inserted into the
`<script>` element, which isn’t accessible to the JavaScript:

`         <script>             {"Name": "Dan Zambonini", "Age": 35}         </script>     `

This is where the padding comes in. In the earlier `<script>` element,
the URL specified an existing function name as a parameter: in our case,
`responseFunction`. The server-side code processing the request takes
this name and wraps it around the JSON output, to modify the response
from a simple line of data to a function call:

`         <script>             responseFunction ({"Name": "Dan Zambonini", "Age": 35})         </script>     `

When the script is processed, the requested function will automatically
execute with the returned data as entered, enabling the data to be
processed.

While workable, the JSONP hack has major drawbacks compared to XHR. HTTP
headers cannot be modified in the request or examined in the response,
which limits communication to GET only, and complicates error handling
and retries. Response data cannot be processed in chunks and must be
formatted as executable JavaScript code. Perhaps most importantly, the
browser executes the returned code immediately and therefore the trust
and ongoing security of the third-party server must be considered.

Summary
-------

Knowledge of the underlying web technologies enables you to develop
workarounds for web browser restrictions and optimise performance and
security.

-   DNS converts domain names to computer-usable identification numbers.
-   HTTP messages govern the requests and responses between web browsers
    and web servers.
-   HTTP is stateless, but cookies can be used to remember a computer
    from one request to another.
-   Content-type HTTP header fields tell the browser what type of
    content is being sent.
-   Character encoding headers tell the browser how to understand text
    files.
-   UTF-8 is the most practical character encoding for the web.
-   Web browsers convert HTML into a document object model (DOM) tree in
    memory.
-   A second render tree is created in browser memory from the DOM, to
    represent the visual page layout.
-   Use a `DOCTYPE` to tell the browser which layout mode to use.
-   JavaScript can modify the DOM, and Ajax techniques can request
    additional data from the server and make partial updates to the DOM.

-   [Table of Contents](/)
-   [Next Chapter](rapid-development.html)

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

-   ^1^ I cunningly sidestep the IPv4 vs IPv6 issue here, as IPv4 was
    exhausted a week before I wrote this chapter. See
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPv6\#IPv4\_exhaustion](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPv6#IPv4_exhaustion)
-   ^2^
    [http://code.google.com/p/browsersec/wiki/Part2\#Survey\_of\_content\_sniffing\_behaviors](http://code.google.com/p/browsersec/wiki/Part2#Survey_of_content_sniffing_behaviors)
-   ^3^
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet\_media\_type](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_media_type)
-   ^4^
    [http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/index.html](http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/index.html)
-   ^5^ [http://www.w3.org/DOM/](http://www.w3.org/DOM/)
-   ^6^
    [http://www.browserscope.org/?category=network](http://www.browserscope.org/?category=network)
-   ^7^ And sometimes more than one node in the render tree per DOM
    node, e.g. for multiple lines of text
-   ^8^
    [http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/visuren.html](http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/visuren.html)
-   ^9^
    [http://www.quirksmode.org/css/condcom.html](http://www.quirksmode.org/css/condcom.html)
-   ^10^
    [http://blog.jjg.net/weblog/2005/02/ajax.html](http://blog.jjg.net/weblog/2005/02/ajax.html)
-   ^11^
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON\#JSONP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON#JSONP)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://webappsuccess.com/web-technology-fundamentals.html
