-   [**Thought**Streams](/)

**

-   [Log in](/account/login/?next=/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/)
-   [Sign up](/account/signup/)

[Your Game Doesn't Need UDP (Yet)](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/)
=========================================================================

### by [glyph](/glyph/)

22 thoughts\
 last posted April 2, 2014, 5:28 a.m.

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/share)

get stream as: [markdown](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet.md) or
[atom](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet.atom)

[**](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/?order=asc "sort ascending")
[**](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/?order=desc "sort descending")

The Internet is full of [articles like this
one](http://gafferongames.com/networking-for-game-programmers/udp-vs-tcp/)
which advise (implicitly novice) game programmers to use UDP as a first
step in designing their game's network protocol.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 4:32
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3047/)

There are [empirical
studies](http://mmnet.iis.sinica.edu.tw/pub/chen06_tcp.pdf) that *prove*
that this is the right thing to do, even!

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 4:37
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3048/)

I'm here to tell you that this advice is wrong (the data on performance
notwithstanding).

Fundamentally there's one reason: UDP is an optimization, so any
discussion of it should be at the late stages of implementation, once
you have something you can optimize.

But it's more complicated than that, of course, and there are a lot of
related reasons.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 4:45
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3049/)

"Use UDP" advice typically comes to exactly the wrong sort of
programmer: one who doesn't know anything about networking specifically
(and even a limited amount about concurrency and message-passing
generally), and is learning. A reliable-delivery transport is hard
enough to understand; adding nondeterminism into the mix makes the
up-front burden of learning that much greater.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 5:05
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3050/)

UDP is particularly tricky and nuanced to learn, partially because it's
non-deterministic, but mostly because it's actually totally
deterministic right up until the point where it isn't. In testing, on
your LAN, on `lo0`, when there's not a lot going on in the game,
delivery is totally reliable, so the code path for recovering from
missed datagrams is never covered, the usability where users are dealing
with lost traffic is never stressed.

Which means that you never see any flaws in your broken, slow
retransmission logic, until it's in front of real users actually playing
it on the public internet.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 5:07
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3051/)

You also *need* to learn how to use TCP for a game, for several reasons:

1.  Not all networks pass UDP. It's better to offer a potentially
    degraded experience than to cut users off from your game entirely.
2.  UDP is appropriate for a few very small classes of data, for a few
    specific genres of game. Not all MMOs necessarily have an open world
    that you physically run around in. Position-update and health-update
    messages only care about the latest state (and therefore can go over
    UDP), but other updates are less time-sensitive and transmitting the
    full state as an update for complex game systems would be more
    expensive than just processing a sequence of changes, which is what
    TCP lets you do.
3.  If you re-invent TCP on top of UDP without a thorough prior
    understanding of TCP, you will get it wrong.
4.  If you re-invent TCP on top of UDP ***without*** a thorough prior
    understanding of TCP, you ***will*** get it wrong.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 5:17
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3052/)

If you're a game programmer who wants to start adding some networking to
a game, **just use TCP** for now.

Then, learn about:

1.  latency
2.  fragmentation
3.  flow control
4.  framing
5.  security ([D]TLS)
6.  monitoring
7.  graceful degradation
8.  statistical profiling
9.  human time perception
10. physical limitations of networking hardware
11. market penetration of different latency/bandwidth uplinks in all the
    markets you care about
12. performance analysis

When you are **done** with all of that, then it's time to start
investigating UDP.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 5:28
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3053/)

You may find, after all of that, that UDP won't even help you in the
ways that it is supposed to.

The general principle here is that "if you can't measure it, you can't
manage it", but there are more specific issues too.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 5:31
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3054/)

When everything is working perfectly and there is no packet loss
(assuming Nagle is disabled), UDP and TCP will perform approximately
equivalently; data gets through immediately, it's delivered to the
application, there's no need to retransmit. And on most modern consumer
networks, packet loss is *very* low. You may never even see the
conditions where UDP should perform better.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 5:47
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3055/)

Even when UDP *should* perform better, the public internet is
increasingly dominated by specialized, highly tuned hardware that knows
about the semantics of TCP, that lets TCP cheat. It won't understand
your special UDP protocol, so you won't get any speed boost from fancy
cheater hardware on the path between you and your players.

[created Dec. 23, 2013, 6:17
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/3056/)

One of the features in TCP which can make TCP “slow” is that *TCP is
sometimes intentionally slow*. For example, TCP uses a startup algorithm
called “[slow start](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slow-start)” and
other congestion-control techniques to avoid [congestive
collapse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congestive_collapse#Congestive_collapse),
i.e. your network blowing itself up and becoming useless. TCP uses
rate-limiting algorithms to intentionally avoid swamping networks to
make them useless, and if your game naively blasts out traffic as fast
as possible, that's exactly what it will do if a lot of people play it.

[created April 2, 2014, 3:45
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4117/)

Especially for the really novice game developers out there, it's
important to note that UDP isn't “faster”. There's a very specific thing
that UDP does differently than TCP, and it has to do with what happens
to the underlying physical network.

[created April 2, 2014, 3:49
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4118/)

Physical networks fail.

They get unplugged. Squirrels chew through the wires. Squirrels
*partially* chew through the wires and water leaks onto them. Your
router will be misconfigured. Your ISP's router will be misconfigured.
Power will fail. Power will surge. Copper corrodes. Fiber decays.

It is because of the pervasive nature of this failure that TCP even
exists.

[created April 2, 2014, 3:51
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4119/)

You see, TCP makes a promise to you. The promise is that if you use a
TCP connection between application X and application Y, and you send A,
then, B, then C, A will get there before B gets there, and B will get
there before C gets there.

Notice I didn't say that TCP promises that A will get there at all.
Maybe a vindictive garden gnome cut your ethernet cable with pinking
shears. Maybe your router caught fire. Who knows; sometimes the traffic
doesn't get through. TCP will simply fail in those cases, but it will
promise that B will not get through unless A does first. It might have
to break up A into multiple pieces, so you might get A[0] A[1] A[2] B C,
but you'll never get A C or C A B.

[created April 2, 2014, 3:54
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4120/)

UDP, on the other hand, may deliver A then B then C (which is what will
happen when you're testing your game on your LAN) or it may deliver C
then A then A then C (which might happen if you're in a low-bandwidth
internet cafe). That's right; it could duplicate your traffic, put it
out of order, and drop it. It makes no promises except a weak offer that
probably the contents of C will be the same on one end of the wire and
the other (and that it won't break up C into pieces).

[created April 2, 2014, 3:56
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4121/)

So what makes UDP “faster” is that if you are sending a sequence of
updates, *and you only care about the most recent one*, then if your
network is dropping packets you can catch up to real time a bit faster.

In order to do take advantage of this property, you don't just need to
“use UDP”. You need to use it in a way where it will help.

[created April 2, 2014, 5:09
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4122/)

First, you need to classify all of the information you're sending to
each player according to whether losing updates is OK. Is it a
rarely-updated statistic, like how much money a player has? Probably
best to send it via TCP, since a missed update means they might have a
wrong number on their screen for a long time. Is it a constantly-updated
value like their `<x,y,z>` position? You're going to be sending a
constant stream of these when they're moving, and it would be fine to
send a periodic pulse when they're standing still, and only the latest
value matters, so UDP might be OK.

[created April 2, 2014, 5:12
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4123/)

Then you have to carefully build a protocol on top of UDP. You need to
be careful to include all the relevant information that will need to be
used to contextualize the information that's received in a datagram. At
the very least this means a datagram number, so that you can determine
which one was sent the most recently, since they might arrive out of
order.

[created April 2, 2014, 5:14
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4124/)

The thing is, once you've classified all your types of information and
designed your messages, *you can actually do a form of this optimization
with TCP too*.

[created April 2, 2014, 5:15
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4125/)

The issue is what happens when there's packet loss. If you blindly blast
out all of your player's movements with UDP, then when there is some
packet loss, their movements will start to appear jerky, they'll pause
periodically, and they'll take impossible paths, but, assuming their
network recovers, they'll generally end up in the right place.

If you blindly send your players movements over TCP, then when there's
packet loss, they'll pause, then rapidly catch up, but take an accurate
path.

[created April 2, 2014, 5:17
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4126/)

But your operating system's TCP stack provides feedback mechanisms to
determine that there has been packet loss – or, for that matter, other
types of network slowdown. While UDP is indeed optimal for real-time
protocols if it's very carefully used, you can preserve many of the
properties of TCP (for example, not needing to implement your own
congestion control) without blindly sending *all* of your players’
movements across the network.

[created April 2, 2014, 5:20
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4127/)

For example, let’s say that your game server sends out a position update
every 20 milliseconds, and it does this all over an individual TCP
connection to each player.

If one client starts to lag, the server can notice that those updates
are piling up on that client’s send queue, and *stop sending updates to
that client*. Then, as soon as the client’s buffer starts to be
consumed, it can send whatever the *most recent* state is, which
compensates for the most serious problem of TCP with respect to real
time protocols, which is that stale updates clog the connection and
leave a player experiencing some temporary packet loss far out of date.

[created April 2, 2014, 5:26
a.m.](/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/4128/)

[Follow @ThoughtStreams\_](https://twitter.com/ThoughtStreams_)

Built by [Eldarion](http://eldarion.com) with Django and Pinax and
hosted on [Gondor](https://gondor.io/).

[Feedback and Support](#)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://thoughtstreams.io/glyph/your-game-doesnt-need-udp-yet/
