[MattSencenbaugh.com](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/)
==================================================

[Search](#search-container)

Primary Menu
============

[Skip to content](#content)

-   [Lean Prototyping](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/lean-prototyping/)
-   [Privacy Policy](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/privacy-policy/)

Search for:

[Programming](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/programming/ "View all posts in Programming")

On Being a Junior Developer
===========================

[November 20,
2012](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/) [Matt
Sencenbaugh](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/author/mattsenc/) [69
Comments](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comments "Comment on On Being a Junior Developer")

Junior developer (for purposes of this post)is a developer with < 2
years experience programming in industry who have an interest in
sharpening their technical skills.

I recently graduated from Stanford with a degree in Computer Science.
I’ve been programming for 4 years and feel comfortable claiming \~1.5
years industry experience through summer internships, failing as a solo
founder, being a lead engineer for a startup, various freelance gigs,
and my current position at a mobile health startup I helped found in
December. What follows is the list I wish someone had written for me as
a developer starting out in the tech industry:

1) Read other people’s code
===========================

Perhaps the best way to enhance your technical ability is to directly
read other people’s code. [Github](http://github.com "Github") is a
fantastic resource; and it’s even better if you have an all star
developer already within your work environment that you can bounce
questions off of. Here are two things I think are particularly valuable:

Focus on naming conventions; good programmers define variables with
names that enhance the readability of the code and also provide intent,
but also don’t couple the variable name to a certain data structure
type.

Try to load the whole system into your head and understand it. Notice
how the various components are decoupled, design patterns, and also how
they have spelled out their unit tests. Holding well designed systems in
your head is very much like visualization within athletics. Visualizing
yourself in a certain athletic situation or doing a specific technique
correctly has been linked to improved performance. Do it for coding too.

2) Plan things out
==================

Before you ever start coding you should sit down with a whiteboard or
pen and paper. These drawings don’t have to be complex, but should
provide you with a holistic view to how all of the components you are
about to code or touch should interact. In addition you should be
exploring different design choices at this stage, it’s much easier to
erase a whiteboard and start from scratch then be a week into your
coding and realize what a mess things have become due to lack of
planning.

3) Have an opinion
==================

As a junior developer you should have opinions and you should have
reasons as to why you have that opinion. Even asking yourself the
question of “why did you make choice X?” as a thought experiment is a
nice way to have a robust answer and solution to your problem. The
reason you need to have opinions instead of simply following along is
because you are literally learning into understanding. Ask yourself the
tough questions so that when a senior developer reviews your code you
have a legitimately robust solution.

4) Ask questions
================

In the very early days of my current startup the backend developer wrote
an abstract base class for all of our Models in Django, which
essentially acts as our very own wrapper on the Django ORM. I was
reading over his code and was very curious as to why he had gone through
the trouble of doing this.. after all isn’t that what an ORM is designed
for? His answer:

“I did that because it makes it easy for us to change the underlying
database without having huge migration issues”.

He had been bitten hard by database migration issues before (in
particular a postgres to noSQL solution) and was prudent enough to take
preventative action.

Ask questions about peculiar things, there is often wisdom and learning
to be had.

5) Explore new technologies
===========================

One of the more unfortunate trends I see with some of my graduating
Stanford CS friends is that they are often afraid to try new
technologies. They have a computer science degree, not a ‘programming
for industry’ degree and it terrifies them a little bit. All Stanford
people have known while growing up is being the top of their class and
naturally gifted. When confronted with a situation they aren’t good at
they often freeze up for fear of failure. As a junior developer it is in
your best interest to fight those instincts and cast your net far and
wide. Every piece of technology you touch influences you in some way,
and having used various technologies exposes you to new paradigms and
ways of doing things. Touching a new technology / programming language
is expanding your ‘world view’ of programming.

Note: The classic debate is functional vs OOP; however even something as
small as giving [Node.js](http://nodejs.org "Node.js") a try can have
benefits. After playing around with
[Node.js](http://nodejs.org "Node.js") I now generally use their two
part callback for asynchronous code because I really like that
decoupling.

6) Embrace unit testing
=======================

One thing I didn’t do enough of at Stanford was unit testing. I had one
TA who bugged me to do it (I still didn’t); however the rest of my
classes never did. We weren’t graded on unit tests and we got to reset
our projects every 10 weeks. University just isn’t built for cultivating
a testing culture.

As a junior developer you really do need to embrace unit tests. I will
advocate for Test Driven Development (TDD) not only because it improves
my confidence that my code is functioning properly but has also really
improved my function prototypes as I generally ‘call’ the function
before its even built. I’m not particularly fond of BDD; however any
form of testing you can do is better than nothing (trust me when it
comes for v 1.1 of your app you’ll want those regression tests too).

7) Refactor
===========

One of the problems of being a junior developer is that you haven’t been
in industry long enough to be bitten by poorly written code that becomes
impossible to maintain. Being a developer isn’t about writing code, it’s
about producing working software while simultaneously hitting business
goals and maintaining expectations. When you start with a blank slate
everything is golden: you get to build from the ground up, features get
spun out faster because they don’t interact with other parts of the
system as much and the sky is the limit. If you are simply slinging code
without any regard to maintainability, after about 6 months you will
have accumulated a huge pile of technical debt. New features can’t get
put out as fast, it takes longer to know what a certain function does
and changing one thing wreaks havoc on another component of the system.
Unfortunately the demand for new features from your users doesn’t simply
decline with your technical debt; in fact it is likely increasing. This
puts developers in a bad spot because they have a tangled pile of code
and non technical folks requesting new features at rapid fire pace who
have no idea what it means when you say ‘spaghetti code’.

So what happens next? The developers say the old system is slow and
everything would magically be better if only we could rewrite the thing
from scratch. So new developers are brought on to maintain the old stack
and your ‘best’ developers begin creating the system from scratch.
Bottom line… this is a huge waste of resources and doesn’t work anyways
(it always takes longer to rewrite than you think, the new stack is
always trying to catch up with the old stack, lots of QA time, etc).

But here’s the kicker, who wrote the initial version in the first place?
**Developers.**

****I want you to imagine for a second a business development employee
approach you and say “Yeah, that old partnership that is supposed to be
our flagship deal is slow and I messed up that relationship pretty bad.
Don’t worry though, if we go get another partnership while still trying
to string the old one along we can be back to full speed!”. That’s
unprofessional, and frankly so is unmaintainable code.

The solution to this is preventative medicine. As a developer you should
be constantly rewriting and refactoring your code. Don’t ever check in
code that isn’t a little better off than before you started.
Maintainable code is code that is easily readable, extendable, and
testable by outside developers.

Unless you have a very very good reason to put in that ‘quick fix’ don’t
ever sacrifice a local maxima of productivity for the long term health
of your codebase.

[![Lean Prototyping & User
Testing](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/wp-content/themes/LanderV2/images/Book_small.png)](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/lean-prototyping)

#### I'm Writing A Book!

If you like my content or want to know more about prototyping and user
testing check it out!

[Lean Prototyping & User
Testing](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/lean-prototyping)

[programming](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/tag/programming-2/)

Post navigation
===============

[Next PostProvide Opportunities For Users to Evangelize Your
Product](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/provide-opportunities-for-users-to-evangelize-your-product/)

69 thoughts on “On Being a Junior Developer”
--------------------------------------------

1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c450c71e8dabafba111b7464c8a25e1a?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **JP** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 12:57
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-2)

    Great read! Being a jr dev I’m learning first hand how it is.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=2#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7aee315c5f028aa6dab6387951acb218?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Zach** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 7:34
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-25)

        awesome post, lots of fantastic tips. jr here too with \~2.5 yrs
        in various roles. Just keep in mind that everything gets twisted
        when there’s lots of pressure and biz interests.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=25#respond)

2.  Pingback: [On Being a Junior Developer | My Daily
    Feeds](http://mydailyfeeds.x10.mx/2012/11/21/on-being-a-junior-developer/)
3.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/47072352ec9c03d25858befd94618ce9?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **GB** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 2:08
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-4)

    I’ll just say that I think <2 years isn't large enough of a window.
    Here in the US Midwest, you're really considered junior until you
    have 5-7 years of experience. I've got 7 and am considered
    mid-level.

    Then again, there aren't as many fly-by-night startups as there are
    serious enterprise software companies.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=4#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:48
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-35)

        Interesting… are there very defined corporate ladders in the
        midwest for programmers? It’s probably my lack of experience,
        but a lot of companies in the Valley don’t necessarily have much
        beyond ‘beginner’ ‘senior’ and ‘management.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=35#respond)

        1.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d008dce761de4d2ad580e48bef8cdffe?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
            **[Justin Baker](http://isacu.lt)** says:

            [November 21, 2012 at 6:12
            pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-48)

            I don’t think time is a good measure of experience at all.
            I’ve met people with years and years of experience over me..
            they’ve been at it almost as long as I’ve been living..still
            do not have the development skills I have… “experience”
            doesn’t replace actual knowledge.\
             I’ve been developing \~7 years.. employed doing it for 6..
            if I were called a Junior Developer I would honestly be
            insulted.

            [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=48#respond)

    2.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b2274f3ca9243183d9b18e6c2458fdca?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Markus** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 11:40
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-42)

        You could say I am a junior developer since my programming
        experience at a real job is quite small. However I do not like
        to value myself to such a worthless system. A person considered
        a junior dev could be well much better at things than a senior
        dev is. There is no guarantee for a developer to be better just
        because he/she have been working for a longer period of time.

        A “junior dev” could be a better programmer, have more knowledge
        than a senior dev. The only thing you should talk about is the
        experience in certain systems / languages that the company use.
        Even if you have 15 years of experience you maybe never used
        NoSQL before and should be considered a junior for the new NoSQL
        -project at work.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=42#respond)

4.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2b4944e403f53976399de916ab5bab20?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **zzz** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 2:34
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-5)

    Unit testing and TDD are lovely ideas but in the real world not that
    commonly practised. It nice to imagine we all write these modular,
    coherent, lowly-coupled classes that can be pulled out and tested in
    isolation – however in the real-world it rarely works out like that.
    Most testing is usually done towards the end and after the
    implementation, and most tests are usually written as simple
    use-cases that test some feature or behaviour against an expected
    output (i.e. regression testing).

    Wandering into a company and blabbering about TDD is a sure fire way
    to mark yourself as a “junior developer” that simply hasn’t been
    exposed to real-life software development, not to mention cause a
    lot of eye-rolling.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=5#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:47
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-34)

        I’m going to have to disagree with this comment. There are
        plenty of examples of companies that do TDD and plenty that
        don’t (with successful companies in each camp). From a personal
        perspective I would rather work in an environment that embraces
        TDD or some form of unit testing than none at all, even at the
        risk of labeling myself as ‘junior’.

        My own codebases are often not pure ‘TDD’, and I even write
        tests after the fact occasionally. It’s not the end of the
        world, but writing tests of any form is a huge step up from
        doing nothing.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=34#respond)

    2.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9995b13c33bc52cae3c904cf40ded119?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Bob Gregory** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 9:42
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-39)

        Have to disagree with this, we expect that junior developers can
        demonstrate some familiarity with unit testing during our
        interview processes, and we require developers to back their
        code with unit tests as part of the development process. QA will
        require an automated test suite before they start testing
        manually.

        If people \*don’t\* write modular, lowly-coupled classes, then
        their work is rejected by a tech lead.

        your comment makes me a sad coder.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=39#respond)

    3.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c3521e4cd3808603a0801f8ba4721a31?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Dan** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 10:54
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-40)

        “Wandering into a company and blabbering about TDD is a sure
        fire way to mark yourself as a “junior developer” that simply
        hasn’t been exposed to real-life software development, not to
        mention cause a lot of eye-rolling”

        Depends what sort of company he walks into, if I walked into a
        company and attempted to raise a discussion (not ‘blather’),
        about TDD & unit testing and I was met with eye rolls and
        derisive comments about my experience as a developer, I would
        promptly leave the company. After all, who would want to work
        for a company populated with dinosaurs who are afraid to embrace
        change and accept that there MAY be a better way of doing
        things?

        Anyway that place sounds to me like some huge Corporation
        populated by guys doing donkey work maintaining legacy systems,
        which is maybe a fine place to work for middle aged guys with a
        family to support, but I’ll stick with my ‘junior’ buddies and
        work at exciting places where people are enthusiastic about the
        development process and different ways to do things.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=40#respond)

    4.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e0adae87611e296b19416fa6b541fc54?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Ben** says:

        [November 23, 2012 at 9:30
        pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-68)

        I strongly disagree with this assertion. Perhaps you haven’t
        been lucky enough to work on a well-tested codebase, or in a
        genuine test-first culture. But that certainly doesn’t mean they
        don’t exist!

        Most of the organizations I’ve known who did little or no unit
        testing always seem to say things like “yeah, we know we should
        get more tests in place, but we just never have time”. In my
        experience, the time they “don’t have” is the time they spend
        tracking down regression bugs.

        I’ve been deeply involved with projects in both types of
        culture, and I can say with utter confidence that test-first
        culture does exist, and that it’s calmer, more stable, and
        people sleep better at night. Oh, and they get more done, too!

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=68#respond)

    5.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4affdf553c6b89251c86f8e55f373799?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Jem Mawson** says:

        [December 4, 2012 at 6:55
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-122)

        I’m going to have to \*strongly\* disagree with this. Today TDD
        is a mandatory skill for professional development, let alone
        unit testing.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=122#respond)

5.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8fa3904dadcbcd10d50de421f3f6ed8c?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Edward Khil** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 3:09
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-6)

    On a trivial note, you count “4″ twice.

    I admire your passion and drive. I also find it amusing that you
    call yourself a junior developer when (at least in all the
    experience you’ve outline above) you’ve been the most senior dev on
    all the projects. There’s a lot of learning that comes from working
    when you’re not the ultimate authority, and cannot pass final
    judgement on every decision that comes your way.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=6#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:44
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-32)

        Edward good points. I have been the most ‘senior’ dev in around
        3/4 of my projects to date; however the projects in which I was
        not the most senior authority is actually where the most
        learning and growth has happened. In my current startup I have
        the fantastic opportunity to work with (and essentially under)
        two devs with 20+ years experience each. Working with them makes
        me feel responsible to work to the same high standard they seem
        to naturally spin out.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=32#respond)

6.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ef14211da642b6e786d9f294c9dde57e?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Bobby Ong](http://www.bobbyong.com)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 3:56
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-7)

    Great read mate. I’m learning my rope around web development and
    your article contain some really helpful advice.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=7#respond)

7.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5b2b185c814bb25f2f95a1152e58f033?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Rory O’Kane](http://roryokane.com/)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:08
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-8)

    Your points “4) Ask questions” and “4) Explore new technologies” are
    both numbered 4.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=8#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:42
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-31)

        Thanks! fixed.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=31#respond)

8.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0c8ea629ee936fdd7c15fe3132782310?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Lujaw** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:13
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-9)

    Great Article. Being a junior developer myself, quite helpful too ..

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=9#respond)

9.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ec956cb8a39da49337b55216d8366e37?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Jonathan Jaeger](http://www.hypedsound.com)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:17
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-10)

    A great read, even for a non-technical person! You’re on point with
    the part about not rewriting everything from scratch. Joel Spolsky
    has a great post about that:
    [http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000069.html](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000069.html)

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=10#respond)

10. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3f25e227753044d276b4c847dafa81d9?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Alan](http://alanisalan.wordpress.com)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:17
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-11)

    Hi, I’m a junior dev myself. Thanks for the tips
    ![:)](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=11#respond)

11. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e75cbb571a2de129765c7f97858e7579?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **fuzhengzong** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:28
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-12)

    good article…

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=12#respond)

12. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/81dc9cc3d1be3bf39bbdc281deb63f36?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Jeff** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:37
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-13)

    There are two number 4s. Does the second one overwrite the first
    one?

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=13#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:41
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-30)

        Haha fixed. Thanks!

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=30#respond)

13. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/f83f7ba2ec84fd08ccff263ad4f3ae79?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Mole** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:40
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-14)

    Very, very good post. I would LOVE to have somebody like you on my
    team :). Actually I did have some people like you on the team in the
    past and they are great to work with. As a junior it’s great to have
    “to much energy”. Just don’t get frustrated by the lessons you
    learn, but actually learn them. I think your post is spot on in that
    regard. Maybe some things to add:\
     - Know when to quit, when you hit a wall at a company. I think that
    it is really great for a junior to start at a big company, learn for
    two years or so, and then do their startup.\
     - Don’t play politics, but watch them and learn. You have nothing
    to loose in the career game yet, so feel free to be outspoken and
    see what happens.\
     - Try to impress. There are few things that are more motivating and
    satisfying than to get that super grumpy guru senior guy to nod and
    say “nice”.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=14#respond)

14. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6dbef86896a188f1af9e8ac33020f272?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Ian Beauregard** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 4:49
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-15)

    Hi ! Thank you for a great read ! I am myself a junior developer and
    have tried to follow these guidelines, but you remind me about \#1
    which I might tend to neglect.\
     I have one suggestion for improving this post though : just by
    reading through, I can very well spot ideas from a well known
    technical book. When I look at the paragraph that starts with “So
    what happens next? ” or when I read “Don’t ever check in code that
    isn’t a little better off than before you started”, I think you
    should give Uncle Bob credit for those parts Or maybe I just
    witnessed a fantastic coincidence : you having the exact same ideas
    in approximately the same words as Uncle Bob.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=15#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:41
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-29)

        Ian do you have a link to the book you are talking about?

        I can definitely say that these ideas were not taken from a
        book; however if there is a well known book that touches on the
        subject I would love to add it to the post in order to give
        people more reading material!

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=29#respond)

        1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/459c0a2dc0dac41d54f92f9a2c914511?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
            **Michael** says:

            [November 21, 2012 at 12:52
            pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-43)

            It’s not the book Ian was talking about but I really
            recommend The Pragmatic Programmer. It covers a lot what you
            talked about in your post.

            [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=43#respond)

        2.  ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/765d1a0e5ff163b5f6357de89e3f65b4?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
            **Loic Antoine-Gombeaud** says:

            [November 24, 2012 at 1:59
            am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-70)

            I believe this is the book Ian was referring to :
            [http://www.amazon.com/Clean-Code-Handbook-Software-Craftsmanship/dp/0132350882](http://www.amazon.com/Clean-Code-Handbook-Software-Craftsmanship/dp/0132350882)
            , Uncle Bob being Robert C. Martin, the author

            [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=70#respond)

15. Pingback: [On Being a Junior Developer | Matt Sencenbaugh's Blog |
    F2E |
    Scoop.it](http://www.scoop.it/t/f2e/p/3419005710/on-being-a-junior-developer-matt-sencenbaugh-s-blog)
16. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4a0dfd37c62706878d6e1c7e18d021fa?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **SC** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 5:07
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-17)

    Thanks for the great article Matt. What courses do you think best
    prepared you for coding in the “real world”? This goes beyond just
    pure systems/programming classes – were there any classes in
    particular that you think helped train your mind for the challenges
    of practical development?

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=17#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4a0dfd37c62706878d6e1c7e18d021fa?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **SC** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 5:08
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-18)

        I should add I’m a Stanford coterm, so specific course numbers /
        professors would be great
        ![:)](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif)

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=18#respond)

    2.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:52
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-37)

        Personally I think the CS core was the most valuable classes I
        ever took. I was HCI focused so I really enjoyed the user
        testing aspects of CS147 and CS247; however that’s not really a
        class to prepare you for development per say (more for product
        development). If we are being honest, doing random side projects
        outside of the CS curriculum is what helped me learn and grow
        the most. There are very few classes that teach the frameworks
        that most consumer technologies are built upon in the Stanford
        CS program.

        Anyways shoot me an email if you want to chat more!

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=37#respond)

17. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8ffff147f653243c2ae307a19ec58da6?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[听海](http://www.tinghaige.com)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 5:14
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-19)

    I hope i can translate this great blog post into Chinese.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=19#respond)

18. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/06fde27a1034a3b4f4f4eebe6dd8c0cd?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **gOVIL** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 5:21
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-20)

    really helpful !!

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=20#respond)

19. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/9e7fc0b2cbf0147c5d33c198a85d5b9a?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Jimmy** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 5:32
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-21)

    I’m a junior developer, although under different circumstances. I
    have worked in IT for years, and found an interest (read: LOVE) with
    programming. I worked in an establishment where they had the
    resources to take me under under a temporary trial position and so
    far it’s worked out great.

    \#4 is interesting, I work in primarily a .NET shop and some people
    in my group (some not all) outright mock anything that isn’t
    directly involved with .NET. Coffeescript? Scala? Passing fads,
    according to some in my group. This kind of thinking seems really
    stagnant and an unhealthy mindset to have in an industry that is
    rapidly evolving and improving.

    I have some ways to go, I’ve only been programming professionally
    for 2.5 years, and I still have so much to learn. Eventually if/when
    I get promoted from Associate Software Engineer (junior) perhaps if
    I feel I have enough to contribute I’ll try and come up with some
    lessons learned.

    Nice post, and I wish more junior developers would be more willing
    to talk about lessons and challenges they’ve learned.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=21#respond)

20. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/5a2fc907a4c9ee4ebe29175ecbdcbc95?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **D** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 6:36
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-22)

    Number 8: Notice silly errors. There are two number 4s. I chose to
    number this 8 instead of 7, given that.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=22#respond)

21. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/71671c8288e04c731bff0f5e3471824c?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Keep it up** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 6:50
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-23)

    Nice work.

    PS You’ve got two 4)’s.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=23#respond)

22. Pingback: [My Homepage](http://www.fyQCJQ6s.org)
23. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2f2235750d06ba822b27244754133238?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **NCR** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 7:48
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-26)

    And last buy not least: Learn to count.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=26#respond)

24. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/03002ec90e286f695b34e5332b929e7f?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Andy** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 7:54
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-27)

    Great read! I will start taking my programming courses next semester
    and I’m excited!

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=27#respond)

25. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c1b2afa3f4c034170bd21991e9e81d60?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Justin](http://justinmarsan.com)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 8:11
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-28)

    Junior Dev as well and I’d like to add a few things in here, things
    I wish I had known sooner.

    Companies still want you. While browsing job opening ads it’s really
    easy to feel like nobody wants you. You need first experiences to
    get a job but you need a job to get experiences. One thing to keep
    in mind is that recruiters describe their \*ideal\* candidate, that
    doesn’t mean they’re going to find him, that doesn’t mean they won’t
    consider your application if you don’t fit the description. If you
    see an ad for 2+ years of experience but believe you have the
    skills, send an email, it only costs a little bit of your time
    that’s all !

    Have something to show. I learned as a self-taught and worked as a
    freelancer, mostly minor tasks in small budget projects. Most of the
    work I did while freelancing would have given a terrible image of my
    skills, because I was asked to do stuff that weren’t so great, but
    being at the end of a chain of command with no way to have my voice
    heard byt the end client, all I did was mostly pushing pixels in PS
    or Css. Once I realized how little I had to show I was proud of, I
    decided to work on my own time on things I could show and say “yep,
    I did that”. One of them was a proof-of concept for responsive HTML,
    even though better solutions have been created since, I was really
    proud to get it working, even prouder to have the smashing mag tweet
    about it, and obviously concerned about some of the comments I got
    about it. But in every interview I got, I talked about it a little,
    it showed I could handle some Javascript, I was concerned about
    performances and mobile experience, that I could do something
    autonomously and it’s the kind of things people look for nowadays
    (especially for a designer/frontend dev).

    Chose your technology based on the market too. It’s really easy to
    browse to your RSS feed (because you should use RSS keep yourself
    updated btw) and decide to pick up that new language everybody is
    talking about. As it turns out, businesses don’t make their
    technological choices for the same reasons as you do. Learning tools
    that are widely asked for is going to make finding a job a lot
    simpler. I like Prototype and scriptaculous but nobody use that,
    might as well go with jQuery it’s the standard, same goes with
    Fireworks and Photoshop, Php versus Nodejs. That doesn’t mean one of
    the solution is actually better than the other, everyone is free to
    have their opinion about that, but one will be more likely to get
    you a job. Once you’ve gotten some experience, have proved your
    skills in the industry feel free to take a look at what’s out there
    again and pick something else and land another job but first I think
    it’d much better to pick up what businesses use.

    One of the mistakes I did was learning how to make e-commerce
    websites with Opencart. I tried many platforms, liked that one best
    and went with it. Businesses mostly use Magento and well if one
    wants to work on e-commerce websites, Opencart Theming is a rather
    useless skill… You can make it a niche but you still have people to
    compete against and less prospects.

    Don’t be embarrassed. If you’re a self-taught like me, outline the
    fact that it takes a rigorous lifestyle and personality to learn a
    job all by yourself, to wake up and work with nobody behind your
    back to tell you to. It can easily be forgotten but it really
    matters, don’t feel like a loser for not having some fancy diploma,
    show how you decided to go your way and managed to succeed.

    Last but not least is to be valuable to businesses. I always thought
    people paid to have me spend time on their project. Like an asset
    like renting a server for hosting or someone’s time to take the
    garbage out. I was wrong. Since I got this new job (around a month
    ago) I’ve been trying to see how what I do (mostly Html/css coding)
    could be useful to the company as a business. Sure the fact that
    pages look good matters, but that’s not all there is to it. I tried
    to spot areas of improvement, pages that could use some re-design
    because they kind of suck and the stats say so, forms where users
    make a lot of mistakes and how they could be improved.

    I took the liberty to do stuff I wasn’t asked to, and tried to see
    how to improve how our business performs. This has already been
    noticed, I’ve been told some stuff I’d done (such as custom google
    analytics reports for 404 and 500 error pages) were really useful
    because of some log issue, that we’d never would have known page X
    in our FAQ was visited so much etc etc. Make yourself valuable to
    the business instead of doing what your title makes you believe you
    should do !

    Last but not least, be nice, I’m sure you already do that but pay
    attention to the little sentences like “wow whoever designed that
    logo is a retard”. You may some day be saying that to the person
    that did design the logo and will be quite embarrassed. Give your
    opinions as concerns rather than critiques, provide alternatives and
    solution. Be whoever you’d like to work with.

    Good luck becoming a senior dev, keep up the hard work
    ![:D](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_biggrin.gif)

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=28#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e0120ec5a2eb4f6f53077b2f53870aec?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Jonny** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 11:36
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-41)

        A really useful and interesting post. Thanks!

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=41#respond)

26. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/90f3365ded98f604461ce5cbee012417?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[James Allardice](http://www.jamesallardice.com)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 8:45
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-33)

    Following on from the “Ask Questions” point, the thing that I think
    helped me the most was actually *answering* questions on Stack
    Overflow. If someone comes along with a better answer than you, you
    will most likely remember that for next time.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=33#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/48fd95a45ad39216322b1b577104b8e1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **[Matt Sencenbaugh](http://www.sencedev.com)** says:

        [November 21, 2012 at 8:50
        am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-36)

        Really great point!

        I love answering questions on Stack Overflow, especially if I’m
        just learning a framework. Makes me dig and really understand
        components instead of ‘copy and paste’ coding you see a lot of
        these days.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=36#respond)

27. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/a18e8f873ec71df3969f4719a98de9cf?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Dominique Dierickx](http://www.dominiek.eu)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 9:36
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-38)

    Nice article, for those who want more, this is an excellent book:

    Pragmatic series “New Programmer’s survival manual”:\

    [http://pragprog.com/book/jcdeg/new-programmer-s-survival-manual](http://pragprog.com/book/jcdeg/new-programmer-s-survival-manual)

    dominiek

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=38#respond)

28. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/2a0b2959ff20e8654aabee4b7e49a6ed?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Harit** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 2:50
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-44)

    Great post!\
     The last part you wrote clearly states the Boy Scout Rule –
    [http://commons.oreilly.com/wiki/index.php/The\_Boy\_Scout\_Rule](http://commons.oreilly.com/wiki/index.php/The_Boy_Scout_Rule)

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=44#respond)

29. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/4a34c8d0afea18583af41c74154b09d0?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **chitradeep** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 3:01
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-45)

    Awesome post, after reading the post everything felt so relevant to
    my current scenario as a developer in a small startup.

    Thanks a lot for accumulating all these points in a post like this.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=45#respond)

30. Pingback: [10 things Junior Developers can do become better
    programmers « The World's Oldest
    Intern](http://theworldsoldestintern.wordpress.com/2012/11/21/10-things-junior-developers-can-do-become-better-programmers/)
31. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cd97469a2b8942ca56ac542856e25b26?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **dan** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 5:50
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-47)

    You motivated me to write a top 10 list.

    10 things Junior Developers can do to become better programmers

    \1. Read other people’s code\
     2. Plan things out\
     3. Have an opinion\
     4. Ask questions\
     5. Explore new technologies\
     6. Embrace unit testing\
     7. Refactor\
     8. Pair program\
     9. Contribute to Open Source Software\
     10. Go to Hacker School

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=47#respond)

32. Pingback: [Develop in the Cloud - Keith Dawson - Friday Four for
    November
    23](http://www.developinthecloud.drdobbs.com/author.asp?section_id=2247&doc_id=254746)
33. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e61d50823d8a61ae2e50aa1b62c29ab5?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Martin Brennan](http://www.martin-brennan.com)** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 9:01
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-50)

    Great article, I’m a Junior Developer with \~2 years industry
    experience and I’m finding all of your points very familiar. The
    only one I’d like to work on more is reading other people’s code,
    because at the company I work for there are only two developers so
    far and I am the senior one and the supervisor.

    I think the most important of these points is the need to plan
    everything out, after all “He who fails to plan, plans to fail”.
    Also refactoring is always important; I look at some of the old code
    that I have written and I just facepalm. It’s great to be able to go
    back and change your old stuff, but sadly you don’t usually get much
    time to in-between new features and bug fixes.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=50#respond)

34. Pingback: [On Being a Junior Developer by Matt Sencenbaugh - Martin
    Brennan](http://www.martin-brennan.com/on-being-a-junior-developer-matt-sencenbaugh/)
35. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/ec684d97a6a0bc2e041a657802ff2ab1?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Paul** says:

    [November 21, 2012 at 9:28
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-52)

    Interesting read. I’d be interested to read an article on being a
    senior developer.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=52#respond)

36. Pingback: [On being a "Junior Developer" | 7
    Degrees](http://7degrees.co.uk/blog/on-being-a-junior-developer/)
37. Pingback: [On Being a Junior Developer | SongXin's
    Note](http://www.songxin.info/on-being-a-junior-developer.html)
38. Pingback: [Articles |
    Pearltrees](http://www.pearltrees.com/t/simplib/articles/id6734938#pearl64913052&show=reveal,6)
39. Pingback: [Friday roundup – 23/12/12 « jfdi
    mark](http://jfdimark.com/2012/11/24/friday-roundup-231212/)
40. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0c467fae76928b14a0c7cf5f2febe8dd?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Annie** says:

    [November 25, 2012 at 4:49
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-75)

    As a junior dev currently working my first major dev experience at a
    startup, I think your post is spot on. When I first started this
    job, I had to hit the ground running. I learned all of those points
    very quickly and \#1 definitely helped me the most.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=75#respond)

41. Pingback: [Issue 28 – Weekend Reading on Thought Leadership and
    Gratitude — TLN](http://www.techleadershipnews.com/issue-28/)
42. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/8bb75c7c1989c0cf27be3f592af639d6?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Kate Matsudaira](http://katemats.com)** says:

    [November 26, 2012 at 9:58
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-84)

    This is a well-written post with great tips for anyone starting out
    a career as a developer. I’d add that networking and getting to know
    your coworkers is good too. Thanks!

    Kate\
     [http://katemats.com](http://katemats.com)

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=84#respond)

43. Pingback: [Offline First – better HTML5 User Experience, Prefetching
    resources, Social Media Sizing Cheat Sheet – Hacks Weekly ✩ Mozilla
    Hacks – the Web developer
    blog](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2012/11/offline-first-better-html5-user-experience-prefetching-resources-social-media-sizing-cheat-sheet-hacks-weekly/)
44. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/83db414051834a0df381ac354039211c?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Bob](http://lapetitefleuronline.com)** says:

    [November 29, 2012 at 11:56
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-101)

    I enjoyed the article and loved your line “Don’t ever check in code
    that isn’t a little better off than before you started.” I am going
    to bring that to my team. It is an easy challenge, but one that can
    be easily implemented if you are using Test Driven Development.

    I’d like to add one to your list: Teach. As soon as you put in the
    time to learn something new, teach it to at least one other person.
    It embeds what you learned in you mind and forces you to ask
    questions that you would not have asked while you were struggling to
    learn the new concept.

    Good article and best of luck

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=101#respond)

45. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/3ae559b4f6963af1073eb1e71d7fefe7?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Not\_a\_jerk** says:

    [November 30, 2012 at 6:35
    am](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-104)

    Really nice post. I think your comment thread demonstrates the need
    for a \#8: “Don’t forget that development is a social
    enterprise–work on your people skills.” There is no shortage of
    (let’s face it) mostly young men in the development world who trade
    in condescension and who will find any little excuse to nitpick in
    an attempt to make themselves feel superior. While it might seem
    okay in the anonymous world of the Internets, being an unsupportive
    ahole doesn’t make your team or your product any better, and will
    get you about as far professionally as it will socially.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=104#respond)

    1.  ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e6f08103396ba4bb6da20d39e80c471a?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
        **Chris** says:

        [July 25, 2013 at 6:01
        pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-580)

        100+!

        Great advice – I work in a team of 25+ devs (all male except
        one) and it is literally a stomping ground of testosterone. It
        can get tiring.

        [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=580#respond)

46. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/b7bdad32610966a386dd0e2e8d025af7?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **MO** says:

    [December 11, 2012 at 11:49
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-168)

    Nice post, thanks.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=168#respond)

47. ![image](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7674ef38e19dab0578f57701a591cca2?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F1.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[Jo Van Eyck](http://jvaneyck.wordpress.com)** says:

    [January 31, 2013 at 2:48
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-433)

    Interesting topic!

    I’m a junior developer myself, and I’m constantly looking around for
    new ways to learn. I’m not in the position where I can bounce ideas
    off of some developer-guru on my current job, so I try to learn by
    myself (coderetreats, code katas, conferences, blogs, books,
    open-source projects,…).

    I found this post very interesting, but it left me wanting a bit. I
    know there isn’t a single path to “software development seniority”,
    but perhaps a reading list, or a list of things you should
    definitely master before you can call yourself a well-rounded
    developer might be interesting.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=433#respond)

48. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/e6f08103396ba4bb6da20d39e80c471a?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **Chris** says:

    [July 25, 2013 at 6:06
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-581)

    Great article – it’s very encouraging to see fellow juniors speaking
    publicly and “coming out” about being juniors. It annoys me when
    people don’t own up to being junior – be proud! Everyone starts out
    as a junior, unless you’re Zuck.

    I would add:

    Leave your ego at home. Be prepared to handle embarrassment, make
    mistakes, and openly encourage your peers. People will recognise you
    as a team player and will respect your humility which isn’t in
    abundance in a male-dominated industry.

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=581#respond)

49. ![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c308514554112d4aba422a6132ce1515?s=34&d=http%3A%2F%2F0.gravatar.com%2Favatar%2Fad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536%3Fs%3D34&r=G)
    **[AnAn](https://netguru.co/)** says:

    [December 10, 2013 at 3:45
    pm](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/#comment-1041)

    Nice read! Adding my 3 cents, I’d say its very important to have
    supportive developers around you who are willing to help you with
    improving your code eg. through peer code review, constant feedback
    loop, pair programming ect. Here’s the story about a guy from our
    team who describes his path as a junior developer.
    [https://netguru.co/blog/posts/what-it-means-to-be-junior-developer-in-netguru](https://netguru.co/blog/posts/what-it-means-to-be-junior-developer-in-netguru)

    [Reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/?replytocom=1041#respond)

### Leave a Reply [Cancel reply](/on-being-a-junior-developer/#respond)

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked \*

Name \*

Email \*

Website

Comment

You may use these HTML tags and attributes:
`<a href="" title=""> <abbr title=""> <acronym title=""> <b> <blockquote cite=""> <cite> <code> <del datetime=""> <em> <i> <q cite=""> <strike> <strong> `

Find me
=======

[@MattSencenbaugh](https://twitter.com/MattSencenbaugh)

[LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/pub/matt-sencenbaugh/20/336/a32)

[Sencedev.com](http://www.sencedev.com)

Search for:

Categories
==========

-   [Game
    Programming](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/game-programming/ "View all posts filed under Game Programming")
-   [Leadership](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/leadership/ "View all posts filed under Leadership")
-   [Lean
    Prototyping](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/lean-prototyping/ "View all posts filed under Lean Prototyping")
-   [LeanLauncher](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/leanlauncher/ "View all posts filed under LeanLauncher")
-   [Popcorn
    Warrior](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/popcorn-warrior/ "View all posts filed under Popcorn Warrior")
-   [PQueue Development
    Process](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/pqueue-development-process/ "View all posts filed under PQueue Development Process")
-   [Programming](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/programming/ "View all posts filed under Programming")
-   [Startups](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/startups/ "View all posts filed under Startups")
-   [The Lifestyle Business
    Challenge](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/the-lifestyle-business-challenge/ "View all posts filed under The Lifestyle Business Challenge")
-   [Traveling](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/traveling/ "View all posts filed under Traveling")
-   [Uncategorized](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/uncategorized/ "View all posts filed under Uncategorized")
-   [User
    Testing](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/category/user-testing/ "View all posts filed under User Testing")

Recent Posts
============

-   [Postcard Panda is now
    live!](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/postcard-panda-is-now-live/)
-   [Two Questions That Will Make You A Better
    Leader](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/two-questions-that-will-make-you-a-better-leader/)
-   [Quantity vs Quality In Early Stage
    Prototypes](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/quantity-vs-quality-in-early-stage-prototypes/)
-   [One Question To Rule Them All – Getting Honest User
    Feedback](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/one-question-to-rule-them-all-getting-honest-user-feedback/)
-   [Postponing the Lifestyle Business
    Challenge](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/postponing-the-lifestyle-business-challenge/)

Archives
========

-   [February 2014](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2014/02/)
-   [January 2014](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2014/01/)
-   [October 2013](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2013/10/)
-   [September 2013](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2013/09/)
-   [August 2013](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2013/08/)
-   [July 2013](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2013/07/)
-   [March 2013](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2013/03/)
-   [December 2012](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2012/12/)
-   [November 2012](http://mattsencenbaugh.com/2012/11/)

[Proudly powered by BitNami WordPress
Stack](http://bitnami.com/stack/wordpress/)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://mattsencenbaugh.com/on-being-a-junior-developer/
