[](http://blog.mayflower.de/ "Mayflower Blog")
==============================================

BLOG /// Development, E-Commerce, Mobile & IT
---------------------------------------------

### Hauptmenü

[Zum Inhalt wechseln](#content "Zum Inhalt wechseln")

[Zum sekundären Inhalt
wechseln](#secondary "Zum sekundären Inhalt wechseln")

-   [Home](/)
-   [Kategorien](http://blog.mayflower.de/Kategorien)
    -   [Mayflower-Advent
        2013](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/Advent-2013)
    -   [PHP](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/3-Development/php-development)
    -   [Events](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/mayflower-events)
    -   [E-Commerce](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/e-ommerce)
    -   [Open Source](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/opensource)
    -   [weitere…](http://blog.mayflower.de/Kategorien)
        -   [Mayflower-Advent
            2012](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/Advent-2012)

-   [English Articles](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/english)
-   [Autorinnen und Autoren](http://blog.mayflower.de/authors)
-   [Über uns](http://blog.mayflower.de/about)
    -   [Kontakt](http://blog.mayflower.de/about/kontakt)
    -   [Impressum](http://blog.mayflower.de/about/impressum)

-   [Menü](#void)
    -   [Home](/)
    -   [Kategorien](http://blog.mayflower.de/Kategorien)
        -   [Mayflower-Advent
            2013](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/Advent-2013)
        -   [PHP](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/3-Development/php-development)
        -   [Events](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/mayflower-events)
        -   [E-Commerce](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/e-ommerce)
        -   [Open
            Source](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/opensource)
        -   [weitere…](http://blog.mayflower.de/Kategorien)
            -   [Mayflower-Advent
                2012](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/Advent-2012)

    -   [English Articles](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/english)
    -   [Autorinnen und Autoren](http://blog.mayflower.de/authors)
    -   [Über uns](http://blog.mayflower.de/about)
        -   [Kontakt](http://blog.mayflower.de/about/kontakt)
        -   [Impressum](http://blog.mayflower.de/about/impressum)

-   [RSS](/feed)

-   [Suchen](#suche)

Suchen

![image](http://blog.mayflower.de/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/cropped-colorful-skies.jpg)

### Artikelnavigation

[← Vorherige](http://blog.mayflower.de/3873-PhpSpec.html) [Nächste
→](http://blog.mayflower.de/3970-So-wird-ein-Coding-Dojo-zu-einer-ernstzunehmenden-Lernveranstaltung.html)

Pimp my Backbone.View (by replacing it with React)
==================================================

[](https://twitter.com/share)

[![Share](//www.linksalpha.com/images/social_share_button.png)](//www.linksalpha.com/social/mobile)

Veröffentlicht am [7. Juni
2013](http://blog.mayflower.de/3937-Backbone-React.html "21:45") von
[Paul
Seiffert](http://blog.mayflower.de/author/Paul-Seiffert "Zeige alle Beiträge von Paul Seiffert")

I’ve been using *Backbone.js* in a couple of projects now and my
feelings about it are quite diverse. On the one hand, I like how it
provides you with guidelines on how to structure your frontend code.
Although splitting model and view is a very basic idea in software
development, it also is very powerful. *Backbone.js* is of great help by
providing collections which aggregate model instances and by being able
to sync these models with a server via RESTful APIs. On the other hand,
it always (and I hope that it’s not just me) seems to be a pain in the
b\*\*\* to figure out the best way to implement a proper view lifecycle
and to keep track of all registered event handlers. If you aren’t
careful when removing or even just re-rendering views, you can seriously
mess up event handling and prevent proper garbage collection. If you are
just a little sloppy, this leads to a slow frontend with an always
increasing memory footprint.\
 I’m not saying that *Backbone.js* is bad in handling UI events, just
that you have to care about too many things that are common to most web
applications. This article describes an alternative to the
`Backbone.View` component.

*React* pragmatically
---------------------

A few days ago, Facebook and Instagram published a JavaScript framework
of theirs: [*React*](http://facebook.github.io/react).

*React* has some interesting concepts for JavaScript view objects that
can be used to eliminate this one big problem I have with
*Backbone.js*.\
 As in most *MVC* implementations (although *React* is probably just a
*VC* implementation), a view is one portion of the screen that is
managed by a controlling object. This object is responsible for deciding
when to re-render the view and how to react to user input. With *React*,
these view-controllers objects are called components. A component knows
how to render its view and how to handle to the user’s interaction with
it. The interesting thing is that *React* is figuring out by itself when
to re-render a view and how to do this in the most efficient way. Let’s
have a look at [an
example](https://github.com/seiffert/blog-articles/tree/master/pimp-my-backbone.view/examples/todolist-react):

/\*\* @jsx React.DOM \*/ var TodoListItem = React.createClass({ render:
function () { return <li\>{this.props.todo.text}</li\>; } }); var
TodoList = React.createClass({ getInitialState: function () { // @TODO:
Listen for changes on the underlying model and call // this.setState({
todos: updatedTodos }) // every time there is a change. return { todos:
[{ text: 'Dishes!', dueDate: new Date() }] }; }, render: function () {
var todos = this.state.todos.map(function (todo) { return <TodoListItem
todo={todo} /\>; }); return <ul\>{todos}</ul\>; } });
React.renderComponent(<TodoList /\>, document.body);

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

/\*\* @jsx React.DOM \*/

var TodoListItem = React.createClass({

render: function () {

return <li\>{this.props.todo.text}</li\>;

}

});

var TodoList = React.createClass({

getInitialState: function () {

// @TODO: Listen for changes on the underlying model and call

// this.setState({ todos: updatedTodos })

// every time there is a change.

return { todos: [{ text: 'Dishes!', dueDate: new Date() }] };

},

render: function () {

var todos = this.state.todos.map(function (todo) {

return <TodoListItem todo={todo} /\>;

});

return <ul\>{todos}</ul\>;

}

});

React.renderComponent(<TodoList /\>, document.body);

This short snippet of code is defining two view components:
`TodoListItem` and `TodoList`. Every time a `TodoList` is created, it is
equipped with one standard todo (I have to remind myself of this every
day!). When being rendered, the list delegates the rendering of single
todos to the `TodoListItem` component class. The resulting components
are then placed into a `<ul>` element. You might think that this is some
kind of pseudocode – it’s not! This is JavaScript with *JSX* which is
being transformed to pure JavaScript before being executed. If you want
to learn more about it, have a look at [React’s
documentation](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/syntax.html) – it’s
really simple to get started!

So far, you haven’t seen more code than required to render a simple
list. However, the simplicity of this short snippet gives you a good
idea of the rest of the framework – it’s really not much more than that.
The same functionality implemented with *Backbone.js* would look
somewhat [like
this](https://github.com/seiffert/blog-articles/tree/master/pimp-my-backbone.view/examples/todolist-backbone):

var TodoListItem = Backbone.View.extend({ tagName: 'li', render:
function () { this.model.on('change', this.render, this);
this.model.on('remove', this.remove, this);
this.$el.html(this.model.get('text')); }, remove: function () {
this.model.off(null, null, this);
Backbone.View.prototype.remove.apply(this, arguments); } }); var
TodoList = Backbone.View.extend({ tagName: 'ul', listItems: null,
initialize: function () { this.listItems = {}; }, render: function () {
this.$el.empty(); this.removeListItems(); this.model.on('add',
this.onTodoAdded, this); this.model.on('reset', this.render, this);
this.model.each(function (todo) { var listItem =
this.getListItemForTodo(todo); listItem.render();
this.$el.append(listItem.$el); }, this); }, remove: function () {
this.removeListItems(); this.model.off(null, null, this);
Backbone.View.prototype.remove.apply(this, arguments); },
removeListItems: function () { \_.invoke(this.listItems, 'remove'); },
getListItemForTodo: function (todo) { if
(\_.isUndefined(this.listItems[todo.text])) { this.listItems[todo.text]
= new TodoListItem({ model: todo }); } return this.listItems[todo.text];
}, onAddTodo: function (todo, collection) { var index =
collection.indexOf(todo), listItem = this.getListItemForTodo(todo);
this.insertListItemAtIndex(listItem, index); }, insertListItemAtIndex:
function (listItem, index) { var $list = this.$el; if
($list.children().length < index) { $list.append(listItem.$el); } else {
$list.children().eq(index).prepend(listItem.$el); } } }); var list = new
TodoList({ model: new Backbone.Collection([ { text: 'Dishes!', dueDate:
new Date() } ]) }); list.render(); list.$el.appendTo(document.body);

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

var TodoListItem = Backbone.View.extend({

tagName: 'li',

render: function () {

this.model.on('change', this.render, this);

this.model.on('remove', this.remove, this);

this.$el.html(this.model.get('text'));

},

remove: function () {

this.model.off(null, null, this);

Backbone.View.prototype.remove.apply(this, arguments);

}

});

var TodoList = Backbone.View.extend({

tagName: 'ul',

listItems: null,

initialize: function () {

this.listItems = {};

},

render: function () {

this.$el.empty();

this.removeListItems();

this.model.on('add', this.onTodoAdded, this);

this.model.on('reset', this.render, this);

this.model.each(function (todo) {

var listItem = this.getListItemForTodo(todo);

listItem.render();

this.$el.append(listItem.$el);

}, this);

},

remove: function () {

this.removeListItems();

this.model.off(null, null, this);

Backbone.View.prototype.remove.apply(this, arguments);

},

removeListItems: function () {

\_.invoke(this.listItems, 'remove');

},

getListItemForTodo: function (todo) {

if (\_.isUndefined(this.listItems[todo.text])) {

this.listItems[todo.text] = new TodoListItem({

model: todo

});

}

return this.listItems[todo.text];

},

onAddTodo: function (todo, collection) {

var index = collection.indexOf(todo),

listItem = this.getListItemForTodo(todo);

this.insertListItemAtIndex(listItem, index);

},

insertListItemAtIndex: function (listItem, index) {

var $list = this.$el;

if ($list.children().length < index) {

$list.append(listItem.$el);

} else {

$list.children().eq(index).prepend(listItem.$el);

}

}

});

var list = new TodoList({

model: new Backbone.Collection([

{

text: 'Dishes!',

dueDate: new Date()

}

])

});

list.render();

list.$el.appendTo(document.body);

This is at least the best approach to a proper handling the view
lifecycle I have come across. As you can see: all the logic for keeping
model and view in sync can be omitted with *React*.

*React* asynchrously
--------------------

There still exists one problem when mixing *Backbone.JS* code and
*React* code: Although the *React* sources itself can be loaded with an
*AMD* loader (like [*require.js*](http://requirejs.org)), the code
written for the use with *React* contains these weird-looking snippets I
explained to be *JSX*. Without an *AMD* loader this is not a problem:
*JSX* source code is included in script tags with a specific type
(`<script type="text/jsx">...</script>`). Scripts with this type are
being detected by a the `JXSTransformer` which translates the *JSX*
source code to pure JavaScript. If you know how *require.js* works, you
can now figure out what the problem is.

For every module you load with *require.js*, a new `<script>` tag is
added to the ``

of your HTML document. Sadly, it is not possible to specify the `type`
of each of these `<script>` tags. To be able to load JXS source files
with *require.js*, we have to use some other approach. This problem
reminded me of another case in which a file that does not contain pure
JavaScript code is loaded with *require.js*: templates. One common way
to load templates with *require.js* is to use the *text* plugin.
Therefore, I had a look at how *require.js* plugins work and whether it
might be possible to load *JSX* code with a plugin, transform it in the
client, and execute the resulting JavaScript code afterwards. What I
came up with is now available on
[GitHub](https://github.com/seiffert/require-jsx) and can be used for
exactly this use case.\
 My plugin is certainly not production-ready, nor has it been tested
excessively. However, you should give it a try and I would also
appreciate some feedback and/or PRs!

Now that we can load source files containing *JSX* code, we can finally
combine *Backbone.js* and *React*.

Reactive Backbone
-----------------

First, we need to set up a little *Backbone.js* application just like we
would do without *React*. Whether you do this with
[*Yeoman*](http://yeoman.io), just [*Bower*](http://bower.io/), or
manually doesn’t really matter. You will end up with an HTML document
similar to this one

<!DOCTYPE html\> <html\> <head\> <link rel="stylesheet"
href="/lib/bootstrap/css/bootstrap.min.css" /\> <link rel="stylesheet"
href="/css/style.css" /\> </head\> <body\> <script data-main="app/main"
src="/lib/require.js"\></script\> </body\> </html\>

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

<!DOCTYPE html\>

<html\>

<head\>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/lib/bootstrap/css/bootstrap.min.css" /\>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/style.css" /\>

</head\>

<body\>

<script data-main="app/main" src="/lib/require.js"\></script\>

</body\>

</html\>

and some JavaScript file (in our case the `app/main.js` script) that
configures the application:

require.config({ deps: ["main"], paths: { jquery: "../lib/jquery-1.9.1",
lodash: "../lib/lodash.compat", backbone: "../lib/backbone", text:
"../lib/text" }, shim: { backbone: { deps: ["lodash", "jquery"],
exports: "Backbone" } } }); require(['app'], function(app) { app.run();
});

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

require.config({

deps: ["main"],

paths: {

jquery: "../lib/jquery-1.9.1",

lodash: "../lib/lodash.compat",

backbone: "../lib/backbone",

text: "../lib/text"

},

shim: {

backbone: {

deps: ["lodash", "jquery"],

exports: "Backbone"

}

}

});

require(['app'], function(app) {

app.run();

});

In the application’s `run` method I would like to start *Backbone.js*‘
history and let a router control the application. In the router, I would
then render view components. To be able to do this, the router needs to
know about *React* and also contain some *JSX* code:

define(['backbone', 'react', 'jsx!view/todoList'], function (Backbone,
React, TodoList) { return Backbone.Router.extend({ routes: {
'\*default': 'defaultAction' }, defaultAction: function () { var todos =
new Backbone.Collection([ { text: 'Dishes!', dueDate: new Date() } ]);
React.renderComponent(<TodoList todos={todos} /\>, document.body); } });
});

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

define(['backbone', 'react', 'jsx!view/todoList'], function (Backbone,
React, TodoList) {

return Backbone.Router.extend({

routes: {

'\*default': 'defaultAction'

},

defaultAction: function () {

var todos = new Backbone.Collection([

{

text: 'Dishes!',

dueDate: new Date()

}

]);

React.renderComponent(<TodoList todos={todos} /\>, document.body);

}

});

});

If we would try to load this file with the default *require.js*
mechanism, we would probably get an
`Uncaught SyntaxError: Unexpected token <`. Now we need to use the above
mentioned *require.js* plugin:

1.  Get it from [here](https://github.com/seiffert/require-jsx)
2.  Put it into your JavaScript directory
3.  Update your *require.js* configuration in a way that it can find the
    plugin and *React*
4.  Add the `router` to the `main` module’s requirements

    require.config({ deps: ["main"], paths: { jquery:
    "../lib/jquery-1.9.1", lodash: "../lib/lodash.compat", backbone:
    "../lib/backbone", jsx: "../lib/jsx", JSXTransformer:
    '../lib/JSXTransformer', react: '../lib/react' }, shim: { backbone:
    { deps: ["lodash", "jquery"], exports: "Backbone" } } });
    require(['app', 'jsx!router'], function(app, Router) { app.router =
    new Router(); app.run(); });

    1

    2

    3

    4

    5

    6

    7

    8

    9

    10

    11

    12

    13

    14

    15

    16

    17

    18

    19

    20

    21

    22

    23

    require.config({

    deps: ["main"],

    paths: {

    jquery: "../lib/jquery-1.9.1",

    lodash: "../lib/lodash.compat",

    backbone: "../lib/backbone",

    jsx: "../lib/jsx",

    JSXTransformer: '../lib/JSXTransformer',

    react: '../lib/react'

    },

    shim: {

    backbone: {

    deps: ["lodash", "jquery"],

    exports: "Backbone"

    }

    }

    });

    require(['app', 'jsx!router'], function(app, Router) {

    app.router = new Router();

    app.run();

    });

The important part here is that when specifying the dependencies of our
main script, we reference the router with `'jsx!router'`. This tells
*require.js* to use the *JSX* plugin to load the file `router.js`.

The resulting application can be found in the mentioned [repository on
GitHub in the demo
directory](https://github.com/seiffert/blog-articles/tree/master/pimp-my-backbone.view/examples/todolist-reactive-backbone).

### Code

If you want to compare the three different approaches used to render
this simple Todo list, have a look at the code:

-   [Todos with
    *React*](https://github.com/seiffert/blog-articles/tree/master/pimp-my-backbone.view/examples/todolist-react)
-   [Todos with
    *Backbone.js*](https://github.com/seiffert/blog-articles/tree/master/pimp-my-backbone.view/examples/todolist-backbone)
-   [Todos with Reactive
    Backbone](https://github.com/seiffert/blog-articles/tree/master/pimp-my-backbone.view/examples/todolist-reactive-backbone)

Hopefully, this article was able to highlight the benefits of combining
*React* and *Backbone.js* and convince you to give it a try. If you have
any questions or want to give me some feedback, feel free to add a
comment or contact me via [Twitter](https://twitter.com/SeiffertP).

Dieser Eintrag wurde veröffentlicht in
[Development](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/3-Development "Alle Beiträge in Development ansehen"),
[English
Articles](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/english "Alle Beiträge in English Articles ansehen"),
[JavaScript](http://blog.mayflower.de/categories/3-Development/javascript-development "Alle Beiträge in JavaScript ansehen")
und verschlagwortet mit
[backbone.js](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/backbone.js),
[code](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/code),
[development](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/development),
[framework](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/framework),
[javascript](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/javascript), [open
source](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/open-source),
[react](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/react),
[require.js](http://blog.mayflower.de/tags/require.js) von [Paul
Seiffert](http://blog.mayflower.de/author/Paul-Seiffert). [Permanenter
Link zum
Eintrag](http://blog.mayflower.de/3937-Backbone-React.html "Permalink zu Pimp my Backbone.View (by replacing it with React)").

[](https://twitter.com/share)

[![Share](//www.linksalpha.com/images/social_share_button.png)](//www.linksalpha.com/social/mobile)

![image](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/067a41709388a19254b103c6722be2ea?s=68&d=identicon&r=PG)

Über Paul Seiffert
------------------

Paul ist seit Oktober 2010 ein Vollmatrose der Mayflower und arbeitet in
einem Team von 6 Entwicklern als Lead-Architekt und stellvertretender
Teamleiter. Zuvor studierte er an der TU München Informatik mit den
Schwerpunkten Software-Engineering und Algorithmik. Sein Tech-Set
umfasst sowohl PHP- als auch Javascript-Technologien wie Zend Framework
1, Symfony2, Node.js und Backbone.js. Paul ist immer an neuen
Technologien und Vorgehensweisen interessiert und schreibt gerne über
Neuerlerntes. Einige seiner Artikel sind hier auf
http://blog.mayflower.de zu finden. Twitter: @SeiffertP Github: seiffert

[Zeige alle Beiträge von Paul Seiffert
→](http://blog.mayflower.de/author/Paul-Seiffert)

Ein Gedanke zu “Pimp my Backbone.View (by replacing it with React)”
-------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  ![image](http://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/481253210/twitter_pic_normal.png)[Mayflower
    (@mayflowerphp)](http://twitter.com/mayflowerphp/status/343101530905378818/)
    sagte am [7. Juni 2013 um
    22:25](http://blog.mayflower.de/3937-Backbone-React.html#comment-426897)
    :

    Lesenswert: Pimp my Backbone.View (by replacing it with React)
    [http://t.co/7fjzkHWScn](http://t.co/7fjzkHWScn)

    [Kommentiere ↓](/3937-Backbone-React.html?replytocom=426897#respond)

### Hinterlasse eine Antwort [Antworten abbrechen](/3937-Backbone-React.html#respond)

Deine E-Mail-Adresse wird nicht veröffentlicht. Erforderliche Felder
sind markiert \*

Name \*

E-Mail-Adresse \*

Website

Kommentar

Du kannst folgende HTML-Tags benutzen:
`<a href="" title=""> <abbr title=""> <acronym title=""> <b> <blockquote cite=""> <cite> <code class="" title="" data-url=""> <del datetime=""> <em> <i> <q cite=""> <strike> <strong> <pre class="" title="" data-url=""> <span class="" title="" data-url=""> `

E-Mail-Benachrichtigung bei weiteren Kommentaren.\
Auch möglich: [Abo ohne
Kommentar](http://blog.mayflower.de/comment-subscriptions?srp=3937&sra=s).

### Bei Mayflower arbeiten wir unter anderem an Projekten für

### Über Mayflower

Mayflower entwickelt seit über 10 Jahren branchenunabhängige
Individuallösungen auf Grundlage von PHP und weiteren State-of-the-Art
Web-Technologien. Mit mehr als 70 Softwareentwicklern an zwei Standorten
ist das Unternehmen einer der größten und kompetentesten
Premium-PHP-Dienstleister im deutschsprachigen Raum. Unser international
anerkanntes Know-how findet sich in Kundenprojekten unter anderem bei
E.ON, Siemens oder Nintendo of Europe.

**Services** E-Commerce • Mobile • Consulting • Development **Open
Source** PHProjekt • PHP\_CodeBrowser • Cinder **Engagement** Deutsches
PHP Manual • PHPUnit • phpUnderControl • PhoneGap • PHP (Zend Engine &
Release Management PHP 5.4) • Mozilla • Piwik Mobile • Zend Framework
**Infos** [mayflower.de](http://mayflower.de) **Kontakt**
[info@mayflower.de](mailto:info@mayflower.de)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.mayflower.de/3937-Backbone-React.html
