[skip to main](#main) | [skip to sidebar](#sidebar)

Simple personal notes

Sunday, March 03, 2013
----------------------

### [Clojurescript and Node.js](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013/03/clojurescript-and-nodejs.html)

For a little while now I've been interested in
[JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/JavaScript). JS
was a strong theme at [Strangeloop](https://thestrangeloop.com/) 2011,
where it was being touted as the next big Virtual Machine. I'd only had
a smattering of exposure to JS at that point, so I decided to pick up
Douglas Crockford's [JavaScript: The Good
Parts](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/9780596517748.do), which I quite
enjoyed. I practiced what I learned on
[Robusta](https://github.com/revelytix/robusta), which is both a
[SPARQL](http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/PR-sparql11-overview-20121108/)
client library for JS, and simple UI for talking to SPARQL endpoints. It
was a good learning exercise and it's proven to be useful for talking to
[Jena](http://jena.apache.org/). Since then, I've thought that it might
be interesting to write some projects in JS, but my interests are
usually in data processing rather than on the UI front end. So the
browser didn't feel like the right platform for me.\
 \
 When [ClojureScript](https://github.com/clojure/clojurescript) came
out, I was interested, but again without a specific UI project in mind I
kept putting off learning about it.\
 \
 At this point I'd heard about [node.js](http://nodejs.org/), but had
been misled into thinking that it was for server-side JS, which again
didn't seem that interesting when the server offered so many interesting
frameworks to work with (e.g. [Rails](http://rubyonrails.org/)).\
 \
 This last Strangeloop had several talks about JS, and about the
efficiency of the various engines, despite having to continue supporting
some unfortunate decisions early in the language's design (or lack of
design in some cases). I came away with a better understanding of how
fast this system can be and started thinking about how I should try
working with it.\
 \
 But then came [Clojure/conj](http://clojure-conj.org/) last year and it
all gelled.\
 \
 When I first heard [Chris
Granger](http://clojure-conj.org/speakers/granger.html) speaking I'll
confess that I didn't immediately see what was going on. He was
targeting Node.js for [Light
Table](http://www.chris-granger.com/lighttable/), but as I said, I
didn't realize what Node really was. (Not to mention that the social
aspects of the conj had me a little sleep deprived). So it wasn't until
after his talk that I commented to a colleague (@gtrakGT) that it'd be
great it there was a JS engine that wasn't attached to a browser, but
still had a library that let you do real world things. In retrospect, I
feel like an idiot. :-)\
 \
 So I started on Node.\

### ClojureScript with Node.js

While JS has some nice features, in reality I'd much rather write
Clojure, meaning that I finally had a reason to try ClojureScript. My
first attempts were a bit of a bumpy ride, since I had to learn how to
target ClojureScript to Node, how to access functions for getting
program arguments, how to read/write with Node functions. Most of all, I
had to learn that if I accidentally used a filename ending in .clj
instead of .cljs then the compiler would silently fail and the program
would print bizarre errors.\
 \
 All the same, I was impressed with the speed of starting up a
ClojureScript program. I found myself wondering about how fast various
operations were running, in comparison to Clojure on the JVM. This is a
question I still haven't got back to, but it did set me off in some
interesting directions.\
 \
 While driving home after the conj, the same colleague who'd told me how
wrong I'd been about Node.js asked me about doing a simple-yet-expensive
calculation like large factorials. It was trivial in Clojure, so I tried
it with ClojureScript, and immediately discovered that ClojureScript
uses JavaScript's numbers. These are actually floats, but for integers
it means that they support 53 bits. Clojure automatically expands large
number into the BigInteger class from Java, but JavaScript doesn't have
the same thing to work with.\
 \
 At that point I should have considered searching for BigIntegers in
JavaScript out there on the web somewhere, but I was curious about how
BigIntegers were implemented, so I started looking the code for
java.math.BigInteger and seeing if it would be reproduced in Clojure
(using protocols, so I can make objects that look a little like the
original Java objects). The bit manipulations started getting tricky,
and I put it aside for a while.\
 \
 Then recently I had a need to pretty-print some JSON and EDN. I'd done
it in Clojure before, but I used the same process on the command line,
and starting the JVM is just too painful for words. So I tried writing
it in JS for node, and was very happy with both the outcome and the
speed of it. This led me back to trying the same thing in
ClojureScript.\

### ClojureScript Hello World Process

The first thing I try doing with ClojureScript and Node is getting a
Hello World program going. It had been months since I'd tried this, so I
thought I should try again. Once again, the process did not work
smoothly so I thought I'd write it down here.\
 \
 Clojure can be tricky to use without Leiningen, so this is typically my
first port of call for any Clojure-based project. I started out with
"lein new hello" to start the new project. This creates a "hello"
directory, along with various standard sub-directories to get going.\
 \
 The project that has been created is a Clojure project, rather than
ClojureScript, so the project file needs to be updated to work with
ClojureScript instead. This means opening up project.clj and updating it
to include [lein-cljsbuild](https://github.com/emezeske/lein-cljsbuild)
along with the configuration for building the ClojureScript
application.\
 \
 The lein-cljsbuild build system is added by adding a plugin, and a
configuration to the project. I also like being able to run "lein
compile" and this needs a "hook" to be added as well:\
 \

      :hooks [leiningen.cljsbuild]
      :plugins [[lein-cljsbuild "0.3.0"]]
      :cljsbuild {
        :builds [{
          :source-paths ["src/hello"]
          :compiler { :output-to "src/js/hello.js"
                      :target :nodejs
                      :optimizations :simple
                      :pretty-print true }}]}

\
 Some things to note here:\

-   The source path (a sequence of paths, but with just one element
    here) is where the ClojureScript code can be found.
-   The :output-to can be anywhere, but since it's source code and I
    wanted to look at it, I put it back into src, albeit in a different
    directory.
-   The :target has been set to :nodejs. Without this the system won't
    be able to refer to anything in Node.js.
-   The :optimizations are set to :simple. They can also be set to
    :advanced, but nothing else. (More on this later).

To start with, I ignored most of this and instead got it all running at
the REPL. That meant setting up the dependencies in the project file to
include cljs-noderepl:\
 \

      :dependencies [[org.clojure/clojure "1.5.0"]
                     [org.clojure/clojurescript "0.0-1586"]
                     [org.bodil/cljs-noderepl "0.1.7"]]

\
 (Yes, [Clojure 1.5.0 was released last
Friday](https://twitter.com/richhickey/status/307520978706112512)!)\
 \
 Using the REPL requires that it be started with the appropriate
classpath, which lein does for you when the dependencies are set up and
you use the "lein repl" command. Once there, the ClojureScript compiler
just needs to be "required" and then the compiler can be called
directly, with similar options to those shown in the project file:\

    user=> (require 'cljs.closure)
    nil
    user=> (cljs.closure/build "src/hello" {:output-to "src/js/hello.js" :target :nodejs :optimizations :simple})
    nil

\
 Once you can do all of this, it's time to modify the source code:\

      (ns hello.core)

      (defn -main []
        (println "Hello World"))

      (set! *main-cli-fn* -main)

\
 The only trick here is setting \*main-cli-fn\* to the main function.
This tells the compiler which function to run automatically.\
 \
 The project starts with a core.clj file, which is what you'll end up
editing. Compiling this appears to work fine, but when you run the
resulting javascript you get an obscure error. The fix for this is to
change the source filename to core.clj***s***. Once this has been
changed, the command line compiler (called with "lein compile" will tell
you which files were compiled (the compiler called from the REPL will
continue to be silent). If the command line compiler does not mention
which files were compiled by name, then they weren't compiled.\
 \
 I wanted to get a better sense of what was being created by the
compiler, so I initially tried using optimization options of :none and
:whitespace, but then I got errors of undefined symbols when I tried to
run the program. I reported this as a bug, but was told that this was
known and an issue with Google's Closure tool (which ClojureScript
uses). The :simple optimizations seem to create semi-readable code
though, so I think I can live with it.\
 \
 Interestingly, compiling created a directory called "out" that
contained a lot of other code generated by the compiler. Inspection
showed several files, including a core.cljs file that carries the
Clojure core functions. I'm presuming that this gets fed into the
clojurescript compiler along with the user program. The remaining files
are mostly just glue for connecting things together. For instance,
nodejscli.cljs contains:\
 \

    (ns cljs.nodejscli
      (:require [cljs.nodejs :as nodejs]))

    ; Call the user's main function
    (apply cljs.core/*main-cli-fn* (drop 2 (.-argv nodejs/process)))

\
 This shows what ends up happening with the call to (set!
\*main-cli-fn\* -main) that was required in the main program.\

### Where Now?

Since Node.js provides access to lots of system functions, I started to
wonder just how far I could push this system. Browsing the [Node.js
API](http://nodejs.org/api/) I found functions for I/O and networking,
so there seems to be some decent scope in there. However, since
performance is really important to [V8](http://code.google.com/p/v8/)
(which Node.js is built from) then how about fast I/O operations like
memory mapping files?\
 \
 I was disappointed to learn that there are in fact serious limits to
Node.js. However, since the engine is native code, there is nothing to
prevent extending it to do anything you want. Indeed, using "require" in
JavaScript will do just that. It didn't take much to find a [project
that wraps mmap](https://github.com/bnoordhuis/node-mmap), though the
author freely admits that it was an intellectual exercise and that users
probably don't want to use it.\
 \
 Using a library like mmap in ClojureScript was straight forward, but
showed up another little bug. Calling "require" from JavaScript returns
a value for the object containing the module's functions. Constant
values in the module can be read using the Java-interop operation. So to
see the numeric value of PROT\_READ, you can say:\
 \
 ``\

    (defn -main []
      (let [m (js/require "mmap")]
        (println "value: " m/PROT_READ)))

\
 \
 However, a module import like this seems to map more naturally to
Clojure's require, so I tried a more "global" approach and def'ed the
value instead:\
 \
 ``\

    (def m (js/require "mmap"))
    (defn -main []
      (println "value: " m/PROT_READ))

\
 \
 However, this leads to an error in the final JavaScript. Fortunately,
the . operator will work in this case. This also leads to one of the
differences with Clojure. Using the dot operator with fields requires
that the field name be referenced with a dash leader:\
 \
 ``\

    (def m (js/require "mmap"))
    (defn -main []
      (println "value: " (.-PROT_READ m)))

\
 \
 Finally, I was able to print the bytes out of a short test file with
the following:\
 \

    (ns pr.core
      (:use [cljs.nodejs :only [require]]))

    (def u (require "util"))
    (def fs (require "fs"))
    (def mmap (js/require "mmap"))

    (defn mapfile [filename]
      (let [fd (.openSync fs filename "r")
            sz (.-size (.fstatSync fs fd))]
        (.map mmap sz (.-PROT_READ mmap) (.-MAP_SHARED mmap) fd 0)))

    (defn -main []
      (let [buffer (mapfile "data.bin")
            sz (alength buffer)]
       (println "size of file: " sz)
       (doseq [i (range sz)]
         (print " " (aget buffer i)))
       (println))) 

    (set! *main-cli-fn* -main)

\
 Since I've now seen that it's possible, it's inspired me to think about
reimplementing Mulgara's
[MappedBlockFile](http://mulgara.org/svn/mulgara/trunk/src/jar/util-xa/java/org/mulgara/store/xa/MappedBlockFile.java)
and
[AVLNode](http://mulgara.org/svn/mulgara/trunk/src/jar/util-xa/java/org/mulgara/store/xa/AVLNode.java)
classes for Clojure *and* ClojureScript. That would be a good
opportunity to get a BTree implementation coded up as well.\
 \
 I've been thinking of redoing these things for Clojure ever since
starting on Datomic. Mulgara's phased trees are strikingly like
Datomic's, with one important exception - in Mulgara we went to a lot of
effort to reap old nodes for reuse. This is complex, and had a
performance cost. It was important 13 years ago when we first started on
it, but things have changed since then. More recent implementations of
some of Mulgara have recognized that we don't need to be so careful with
disk space any more, but Rich had a clearer insight: not only *can* we
keep older transactions, but we *should*. As soon as I realized that,
then I realized it would be easy to improve performance dramatically in
Mulgara. However, to make it worthwhile we'd have to expose the internal
phase information in the same way that Datomic does.\
 \
 Unfortunately, Mulgara is less interesting to me at the moment, since
it's all in Java, which is why I'm moving to re-implement so much RDF
work in Clojure at the moment. A start to that can be found in
[crg](https://github.com/quoll/CRG),
[crg-turtle](https://github.com/quoll/crg-turtle), and
[kiara](https://github.com/quoll/kiara). Mulgara isn't going away... but
it will get modernized.\

### More in ClojureScript

Family is calling, so I need to wrap this post up. Funnily enough, I
didn't get to write about the thing that made me think to blog in the
first place. That's bit manipulations.

\

You'll recall that I mentioned the lack of a BigInteger in ClojureScript
(since it's a Java class). As an exercise in doing more in
ClojureScript, and learning about how BigInteger is implemented, I
started trying to port this class in Clojure (and ultimately,
ClojureScript). The plumbing is easy enough, as I can just use a record
and a protocol, but some of the internals have been trickier. That's
because BigInteger packs the numbers into an array of bits, that is in
turn represented with an int array. More significantly, BigInteger does
lots of bit manipulation on these ints.

\

Bit manipulation *is* supported in JavaScript and ClojureScript, but
with some caveats. One problem is that the non-sign-extending
right-shift operation (\>\>\>) is not supported. I was surprised to
learn that it isn't supported in Clojure either (this seems strange to
me, since it would be trivial to implement). The bigger problem is that
numbers are stored as floating point values. Fortunately, numbers of 32
bits or smaller can be treated as unsigned integers. However, integers
can get larger than this limit, and if that happens, then some of the
bit operations stop working. It's possible to do bit manipulation up to
53 bits, but signed values won't work as expected in that range, so it's
basically off the table.

\

Anyway, I have a lot to learn yet, and a long way to go to even compare
how a factorial in ClojureScript will compare to the same operation in
Clojure, but in the meantime, it's fun. Searching for Node.js modules
has shown a lot of early exploration is being performed by people from
all over. Some of the recent threading modules are a good example of
this.

\

I have a feeling that Node.js will get more important as time goes on,
and with it, ClojureScript.

Posted by Paul G at [Sunday, March 03,
2013](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013/03/clojurescript-and-nodejs.html "permanent link")
[![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/icon18_edit_allbkg.gif)](http://www.blogger.com/post-edit.g?blogID=6848574&postID=546116993676252526&from=pencil "Edit Post")

#### 2 comments:

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/blank.gif "Tyler Tallman")](http://www.blogger.com/profile/08087848342064196852)

![image](//lh3.googleusercontent.com/-6gwOcblzCRs/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAY4c/cgYc6zqaseo/s512-c/photo.jpg)

[Tyler Tallman](http://www.blogger.com/profile/08087848342064196852)
said...

You should look at the google closure integer library.

[7:20
AM](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013/03/clojurescript-and-nodejs.html?showComment=1362403248957#c3113836259660044741 "comment permalink")
[![image](//www.blogger.com/img/icon_delete13.gif)](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=6848574&postID=3113836259660044741 "Delete Comment")

[![image](http://img2.blogblog.com/img/b16-rounded.gif "zilti")](http://www.blogger.com/profile/17651049649150824198)

[zilti](http://www.blogger.com/profile/17651049649150824198) said...

"starting the JVM is just too painful for words"\
\
Um. Are you working on a 90s PC? On my PC compiling and then running the
cljs code takes way longer than starting a clj program. (Not to forget
that you have to start the JVM anyway to work with ClojureScript).\
\
Anyway I'm surprised that Clojure+NodeJS+Desktop is a thing.

[5:59
PM](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013/03/clojurescript-and-nodejs.html?showComment=1385423999509#c8039027023925964910 "comment permalink")
[![image](//www.blogger.com/img/icon_delete13.gif)](http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=6848574&postID=8039027023925964910 "Delete Comment")

[Post a
Comment](http://www.blogger.com/comment.g?blogID=6848574&postID=546116993676252526)

[Newer
Post](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013/12/ddd-on-mavericks.html "Newer Post")
[Older
Post](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2012/08/tnetstrings.html "Older Post")
[Home](http://gearon.blogspot.com/)

Subscribe to: [Post Comments
(Atom)](http://gearon.blogspot.com/feeds/546116993676252526/comments/default)

Semantic Links
--------------

[![image](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/images/pub/feed-icon16x16.png)](http://feeds.feedburner.com/blogspot/juiue)
[Subscribe to this page](http://feeds.feedburner.com/blogspot/juiue)\

[![image](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/images/pub/feed-icon16x16.png)](http://pgearon.blogspot.com/atom.xml)
[Personal blog](http://pgearon.blogspot.com/atom.xml)\
[Add to Technorati
Favorites](http://technorati.com/faves?sub=addfavbtn&add=http://gearon.blogspot.com)\
[@quoll](http://twitter.com/quoll)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=6848574&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML2&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

About Me
--------

[![My
Photo](//lh4.googleusercontent.com/-USgbVKn3TEU/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAKo/Xw2Nyx_aLzQ/s512-c/photo.jpg)](https://plus.google.com/100668892532764880574)

[Paul G](https://plus.google.com/100668892532764880574) \

[View my complete
profile](https://plus.google.com/100668892532764880574)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=6848574&widgetType=Profile&widgetId=Profile1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

-   [Mulgara](http://mulgara.org/)
-   [Planet Clojure](http://planet.clojure.in/)
-   [Planet RDF](http://www.planetrdf.com/)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=6848574&widgetType=LinkList&widgetId=LinkList2&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

Blog Archive
------------

-   [▼](javascript:void(0))
    [2013](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2013-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2014-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=2)
    (2)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013_12_01_archive.html)
        (1)

    -   [▼](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013_03_01_archive.html) (1)
        -   [Clojurescript and
            Node.js](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013/03/clojurescript-and-nodejs.html)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2012](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2012-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2013-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=3)
    (3)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2012_08_01_archive.html) (2)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2012_05_01_archive.html) (1)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2011](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2011-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2012-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=3)
    (3)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2011_09_01_archive.html)
        (3)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2010](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2010-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2011-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=10)
    (10)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2010_10_01_archive.html)
        (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2010_05_01_archive.html) (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2010_04_01_archive.html) (6)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2009](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2009-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2010-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=6)
    (6)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2009_05_01_archive.html) (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2009_02_01_archive.html)
        (5)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2008](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2008-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2009-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=18)
    (18)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_12_01_archive.html)
        (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_09_01_archive.html)
        (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_07_01_archive.html) (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_06_01_archive.html) (2)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_05_01_archive.html) (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_04_01_archive.html) (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_03_01_archive.html) (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2008_01_01_archive.html)
        (4)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2007](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2007-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2008-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=50)
    (69)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_12_01_archive.html)
        (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_11_01_archive.html)
        (2)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_10_01_archive.html)
        (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_09_01_archive.html)
        (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_08_01_archive.html) (5)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_07_01_archive.html) (8)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_06_01_archive.html) (21)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_05_01_archive.html) (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_04_01_archive.html) (7)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_03_01_archive.html) (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_02_01_archive.html)
        (4)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2007_01_01_archive.html)
        (5)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2006](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2006-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2007-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=36)
    (36)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_11_01_archive.html)
        (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_10_01_archive.html)
        (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_09_01_archive.html)
        (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_08_01_archive.html) (5)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_07_01_archive.html) (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_05_01_archive.html) (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_04_01_archive.html) (1)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_03_01_archive.html) (5)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_02_01_archive.html)
        (8)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2006_01_01_archive.html)
        (8)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2005](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2005-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2006-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=50)
    (88)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_12_01_archive.html)
        (8)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_11_01_archive.html)
        (4)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_09_01_archive.html)
        (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_08_01_archive.html) (6)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_07_01_archive.html) (3)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_06_01_archive.html) (9)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_05_01_archive.html) (10)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_04_01_archive.html) (10)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_03_01_archive.html) (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_02_01_archive.html)
        (12)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2005_01_01_archive.html)
        (3)

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2004](http://gearon.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2004-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&updated-max=2005-01-01T00:00:00-06:00&max-results=50)
    (162)
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_12_01_archive.html)
        (7)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_11_01_archive.html)
        (20)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_10_01_archive.html)
        (21)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_09_01_archive.html)
        (19)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_08_01_archive.html)
        (11)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_07_01_archive.html) (25)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_06_01_archive.html) (16)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_05_01_archive.html) (25)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://gearon.blogspot.com/2004_04_01_archive.html) (18)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=6848574&widgetType=BlogArchive&widgetId=BlogArchive1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

CURRENT MOON\

\

\

[![eXTReMe
Tracker](http://t1.extreme-dm.com/i.gif)](http://extremetracking.com/open?login=pagearon)

![image](http://e1.extreme-dm.com/s10.g?login=pagearon&j=n&jv=n)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=6848574&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://gearon.blogspot.com/2013/03/clojurescript-and-nodejs.html
