-   -   Search
-   [Film](/film)
-   [About](/magazine/about)

[](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Follow[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)[](https://twitter.com/#!/aeonmag)

Daily or Weekly

-   [Philosophy](http://aeon.co/magazine/philosophy/ "Philosophy")
-   [Science](http://aeon.co/magazine/science/ "Science")
-   [Psychology](http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/ "Psychology")
-   [Health](http://aeon.co/magazine/health/ "Health")
-   [Society](http://aeon.co/magazine/society/ "Society")
-   [Technology](http://aeon.co/magazine/technology/ "Technology")
-   [Culture](http://aeon.co/magazine/culture/ "Culture")

-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about)
-   [Film](http://aeon.co/film)
-   [Most popular](http://aeon.co/magazine/most-popular/ "Most Popular")
-   [Our writers](http://aeon.co/magazine/contributors/ "Our writers")

-   Search
-   [Film](http://aeon.co/film)
-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about)

[](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon Magazine")

Daily Weekly

Newsletter

Follow

[](https://twitter.com/aeonmag)
[](https://www.facebook.com/AeonMagazine)

-   [Philosophy](http://aeon.co/magazine/philosophy/ "Philosophy")
-   [Science](http://aeon.co/magazine/science/ "Science")
-   [Psychology](http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/ "Psychology")
-   [Health](http://aeon.co/magazine/health/ "Health")
-   [Society](http://aeon.co/magazine/society/ "Society")
-   [Technology](http://aeon.co/magazine/technology/ "Technology")
-   [Culture](http://aeon.co/magazine/culture/ "Culture")

Hesitate!
=========

Quick decision-making might seem bold, but the agony of indecision is your brain’s way of making a better choice
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

by [Steve
Fleming](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/steve-fleming/ "Read more articles by Steve Fleming")
2500 2,500 words

-   Read later or Kindle
    -   -   -   -   ![Kindle](https://d1xnn692s7u6t6.cloudfront.net/white-15.png)Kindle

![In the toyshop, 1950. Photo by Bert Hardy/Picture
Post/Getty](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/10/Indecision.jpg)

In the toyshop, 1950. *Photo by Bert Hardy/Picture Post/Getty*

[Steve
Fleming](http://aeon.co/magazine/author/steve-fleming/ "Read more articles by Steve Fleming")
is a cognitive neuroscientist. He is a postdoctoral fellow at New York
University and a blogger at The Elusive Self.

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/indecision-is-sometimes-the-best-way-to-decide/#comments)

[](http://www.reddit.com/submit)

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/indecision-is-sometimes-the-best-way-to-decide/#comments)

In the autumn of 2007, the then prime minister of the UK, Gordon Brown,
was riding on a wave of popularity. He had just taken the reins from
Tony Blair, adroitly dealt with a series of national crises (terrorist
plots, foot and mouth disease, floods) and was preparing to go to the
country for a new mandate for his government. But then a decision to
postpone the election tarred him with a reputation for dithering and his
authority began to crumble. The lasting impression was not one of astute
politicking — it was of a man plagued by indecision.

Whether lingering too long over the menu at a restaurant, or abrupt
U-turns by politicians, flip-flopping does not have a good reputation.
By contrast, quick, decisive responses are associated with competency:
they command respect. Acting on gut feelings without agonising over
alternative courses of action has been given scientific credibility by
popular books such as Malcolm Gladwell’s *Blink*(2005), in which the
author tries to convince us of ‘a simple fact: decisions made very
quickly can be every bit as good as decisions made cautiously and
deliberately’. But what if the allure of decisiveness were leading us
astray? What if flip-flopping were adaptive and useful in certain
scenarios, shepherding us away from decisions that the devotees of
*Blink*might end up regretting? Might a little indecision actually be a
useful thing?

Let’s begin by casting a critical eye over our need for decision-making
speed. It has been known for many years that the subjective ease with
which we process information — termed ‘fluency’ by psychologists —
affects how much we like or value things. For example, people judge
fluent statements as more truthful, and easy-to-see objects as more
attractive. This effect has consequences that extend beyond the lab: the
psychologists Adam Alter and Daniel Oppenheimer, of the Stern School of
Business in New York and the Anderson School of Management in Los
Angeles respectively, found that if it a company name is easy to
pronounce, it tends to have a higher stock price, all else being equal.
The interpretation is that fluent processing of information leads people
implicitly to attach more value to the company.

Fluency not only affects our perceptions of value; it also changes how
we feel about our decisions. For example, if stimuli are made brighter
during a memory test people feel more confident in their answers despite
them being no more likely to be correct. In a study I conducted in 2009
with the psychologists Dorit Wenke and Patrick Haggard at University
College London, we asked whether making actions more fluent also altered
people’s sense of control over their decisions. We didn’t want to
obviously signal that we were manipulating fluency, so we inserted a
very briefly flashed arrow before the target appeared. In a separate
experiment we confirmed that participants were not able to detect this
arrow consciously. However, it still biased their decisions, slowing
them down if the arrow was opposite in direction to their eventual
choice, and speeding them up if it was in the same direction. We found
that people felt more control over these faster, fluent decisions, even
though they were unaware of the inserted arrow.

Fluent decisions, therefore, are associated with feelings of confidence,
control, being in the zone. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, professor of
psychology and management at Claremont GraduateUniversity in California,
has termed this the feeling of ‘flow’. For highly practised tasks,
fluency and accuracy go hand in hand: a pianist might report feelings of
flow when performing a piece that has been internalised after years of
practice. But in novel situations, might our fondness for fluency
actually hurt us?

To answer this question we need to digress a little. At the end of the
Second World War, engineers were working to improve the sensitivity of
radar detectors. The team drafted a working paper combining some new
maths and statistics about the scattering of the target, the power of
the pulse, and so on. They had no way of knowing at the time, but the
theory they were sketching — signal detection theory, or SDT — would
have a huge impact on modern psychology. By the 1960s, psychologists had
become interested in applying the engineers’ theory to understand
*human*detection — in effect, treating each person like a mini radar
detector, and applying exactly the same equations to understand their
performance.

Despite the grand name, SDT is deceptively simple. When applied to
psychology, it tells us that decisions are *noisy*. Take the task of
choosing the brighter of two patches on a screen. If the task is made
difficult enough, then sometimes you will say patch ‘A’ when in fact the
correct answer is ‘B’. On each ‘trial’ of our experiment, the brightness
of each patch leads to firing of neurons in your visual cortex, a region
of the brain dedicated to seeing. Because the eye and the brain form a
noisy system — the firing is not exactly the same for each repetition of
the stimulus — different levels of activity are probabilistic. When a
stimulus is brighter, the cortex *tends* to fire more than when it is
dimmer. But on some trials a dim patch will give rise to a high firing
rate, due to random noise in the system. The crucial point is this: you
have access to the outside world only *via the firing of your visual
cortical neurons*. If the signal in cortex is high, it will seem as
though that stimulus has higher contrast, even if this decision turns
out to be incorrect. Your brain has no way of knowing otherwise.

But it turns out the brain has a trick up its sleeve when dealing with
noisy samples of information, a trick foreshadowed by the British
mathematician Alan Turing while in charge of wartime code-breaking
efforts at the secret Bletchley Park complex. Each morning, the
code-breakers would try new settings of the German Enigma machine in
attempts to decode intercepted messages. The problem was how long to
keep trying a particular pair of ciphers before discarding it and trying
another. Turing showed that by accumulating multiple samples of
information over time, the code-breakers could increase their confidence
in a particular setting being correct.

Remarkably, the brain appears to use a similar scheme of evidence
accumulation to deal with difficult decisions. We now know that, instead
of relying on a one-off signal from the visual cortex, other areas of
the brain, such as the parietal cortex, integrate several samples of
information over hundreds of milliseconds before reaching a decision.
Furthermore, this family of evidence accumulation models does a very
good job at predicting the complex relationships between people’s
response times, error rates and confidence in simple tasks such as the
A/B decision above.

Putting these findings together, we learn that there is a benefit from
being slow. When faced with a novel scenario, one that hasn’t been
encountered before, Turing’s equations tell us that slower decisions are
more accurate and less susceptible to noise. In psychology, this is
known as the ‘speed-accuracy trade-off’ and is one of the most robust
findings in the past 100 years or so of decision research. Recent
research has begun to uncover a specific neural basis for setting this
trade-off. Connections between the cortex and a region of the brain
known as the subthalamic nucleus control the extent to which an
individual will slow down his or her decisions when faced with a
difficult choice. The implication is that this circuit acts like a
temporary brake, extending decision time to allow more evidence to
accumulate, and better decisions to be made.

We don’t yet know whether these insights apply to the weighing of more
abstract information, such as decisions about restaurants or holiday
destinations. But there are hints that a signal detection-like model
might explain these choices too. Daniel McFadden, a Nobel Prize-winning
economist at the University of California, Berkeley, proposed an
influential theory of choice in the 1970s directly inspired by signal
detection theory. The core idea is that the values we assign to choice
options are themselves subject to random fluctuations. These
fluctuations then lead to different choices from moment to moment.

> The agonising feeling of conflict between two options is not
> necessarily a bad thing: it is the brain’s way of slowing things down

In a recent study, researchers at the California Institute of Technology
(CalTech) looked for signs of this accumulation of value while
undergraduates chose between snack items, such as chips or cookies.
During each decision, two items were presented on either side of a
computer screen, and the students’ eye movements were recorded. Despite
decisions being made within a couple of seconds, the pattern of eye
movements belied subtle aspects of the decision process. When the
decision was difficult — when the items were equally appealing — the
eyes switched back and forth between the items more often than when the
decision was easy. How much we flip between decision items, therefore,
reveals the accumulation of evidence for decision-making.

In the evidence accumulation framework, indecision has a surprisingly
simple interpretation. ‘Activity’ vacillates between two options over a
particular time period — milliseconds for sensory A/B decisions, but
perhaps minutes or even days for important decisions such as buying a
car. Crucially, however, this neural flip-flopping is not something to
be avoided. Instead, flip-flopping is an overt behavioural sign of the
brain’s weighing of evidence for and against a decision. Anecdotal
evidence suggests we are not alone in showing overt signs of
indecisiveness. In a pioneering experiment, J David Smith, professor of
psychology at the University of Buffalo in New York, trained a dolphin
named Natua to press one of two levers depending on whether a sound was
low- or high-pitched. After Natua could perform the task on cue, Smith
introduced ambiguous tones. Natua vacillated between the two levers,
swimming towards one and then the other, as if he was uncertain which
one to press.

Some researchers have interpreted these signs of indecision as
indicating that the dolphin has awareness of its own uncertainty during
the decision. This could be the case, but it does not have to be — it
could be that swimming from one option to the other is the dolphin
equivalent of humans moving their eyes between options in the CalTech
study. Either way, evidence accumulation models tell us that indecision
is not a bad thing — the brain is slowing things down for a reason.

The speed-accuracy trade-off indicates that there can be negative
consequences from being too decisive. Quicker decisions are often
associated with more errors and greater potential for regret further
down the line. If we are forced to make a decision quickly, evidence
accumulation might not have finished before the decision is executed. By
the time our muscles are contracting and we are pressing the ‘send’
button on a rash email, we might have accumulated additional evidence to
suggest that this is not a good idea. Such gradual realisation of regret
is writ large in Ian McEwan’s novel *Atonement* (2001) in which one of
the characters, Robbie, is ‘seized by horror and absolute certainty’
that the letter he has just sent to his sweetheart is not the one he
intended, with consequences that ripple through the rest of his story.

The implication is that sometimes our actions decouple from our
intentions, revealing an intimate connection between evidence
accumulation, indecision and error correction. Experiments support our
intuitions about this: in a simple A/B decision, within only tens of
milliseconds after the wrong button is pressed, the muscles controlling
the correct response begin to contract in order to rectify the error.
For rash emailers, this response even has a modern corrective: Gmail
users are now able to set up a 30-second grace period in which to ‘undo’
a previously sent message. In other words, a response can be made, or an
email sent, *before* our decision circuitry has appropriately weighed up
all the evidence. Yet only a short time later, when enough evidence has
been accumulated, we might become aware of something we should have said
or done, the *l’esprit de l’escalier* of the neurosciences.

Consistent with this idea, a recent study by the neuroscientists Lucie
Charles and Stanislas Dehaene at the Neurospin Centre in Paris showed
that when subjects make errors under time pressure, a neural signature
of the response that was *intended* but not actually *executed* can be
identified. Part of your brain seems to know what you should have done,
even if the decision was executed too quickly, and too imperfectly, for
the right action to have been made. In contrast, when given enough time
to operate, intention and action work together in reasonable harmony,
minimising the chances of a subsequent change of mind or regret.

Indecision is an inevitable feature of the neural mechanisms that
underpin decision-making. With the right experimental set-up, we can
observe the vacillations produced by this system in people’s behaviour.
Cortico-basal ganglia circuits set the trade-off between speed and
accuracy, and exquisitely sensitive mechanisms detect and correct errors
even after decisions have been made. Yet decisiveness holds a subjective
allure, perhaps because of the illusion of fluency, control and
confidence it creates.

How should we reconcile the benefits of accumulating evidence with the
costs of feeling disfluent? For simple decisions that take only a few
seconds to make — from whether to reply to an email now or later, or
which salad to have for lunch — there are some clear guidelines. First,
decision-making tends to become more accurate if given a little extra
time to operate. We should allow some indecision into our lives. Second,
the agonising feeling of conflict between two options is not necessarily
a bad thing: it is the brain’s way of slowing things down to allow a
good decision to be made. Third, we should not ignore or suppress a
change of mind after the fact — it is our brain’s way of using all the
available information to correct inevitable errors in a time-limited
process.

For important real-world decisions, however, the picture is certainly
more complicated. The neuroscience of decision-making is in its infancy.
Humans are endowed with the ability to simulate the future, and to use
language to weigh up pros and cons — we can argue with ourselves and
bounce ideas off others — all of which make such decisions very complex.
But consider that important decisions are often the most difficult
because they induce a state of *in*decision. (Charles Darwin even made a
list of the pros and cons when deciding whether to marry, eventually
deciding the pros outweighed the cons.) In these cases, our current
understanding of the delicate balance of decision circuitry suggests we
shouldn’t just blink and go with our gut instinct. In *Habit* (1890),
the American philosopher William James said: ‘There is no more miserable
human being than one in whom nothing is habitual but indecision.’ Yet
enduring a little bracing indecision might be just what we need to
navigate a busy, confusing world of choices.

*8 January 2014*

[](#top)

*Read more essays on
[cognition](http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/cognition/ "view all essays in cognition")
and
[neuroscience](http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/neuroscience/ "view all essays in neuroscience")*

Comments

-   rameshraghuvanshi

    Every man is unique so his decision taking system is
    different.Recent research in neuroscience proved that our all
    decision are taken by our unconscious mind.Philosopher Spinoza wrote
    long ago " Men believes to be free,simply because they are conscious
    of their actions,and unconscious of the causes whereby those actions
    are determined" . So in decision making no fix rule and regulations
    are working.

    -   Walter Braun

        "Every man is unique so his decision taking system is
        different."

        Is this statement supposed to express a belief, a wish, a hope?
        If it is supposed to be a 'fact' we have to ask: unique in what
        respect? Neither from our genetic endowment nor from our
        upbringing can we categorically claim 'uniqueness'.

        "Recent research in neuroscience proved that our all decision
        are taken by our unconscious"

        This, then, must also be true in the case of each scientific
        study and each work of art, including your own comment. And
        Spinoza wasn't free to make his statement either. Then point
        then would be ...?

-   SimonSays

    This is amazing: "a recent study by the neuroscientists Lucie
    Charles and Stanislas Dehaene at the Neurospin Centre in Paris
    showed that when subjects make errors under time pressure, a neural
    signature of the response that was intended but not actually
    executedcan be identified."

    -   ApathyNihilism

        Why amazing? In a difficult decision, one probably considered
        that alternative.

-   Pooja Parthasarathy

    Daniel Kahneman's work on System 1 and System 2 thinking is very
    pertinent to this article.

-   Skanik

    I had a student who was very methodical on his Exams and in writing
    up his

    research.

    Often he would not answer all 10 questions on the exam - only 8 -
    but his solutions

    were always correct. His thesis took forever to finish but his
    results were important

    and elegantly presented. I would describe him as not a quick thinker
    but a profound

    thinker.

    The SAT rewards you, mainly, not for deep thinking but for quick
    thinking.

    All those "incredibly bright people" who brought economic ruin on
    the world

    - were they quick thinkers or profound thinkers ?

    If they are mainly 'Quick Thinkers" are we not planting the seeds of
    our

    own ruin by rewarding them for their fluent but somewhat shallow
    thoughts ?

    -   Lu Jing

        SAT's speed-sensitive method of testing is not actually about
        quick thinking or profound thinking, it's actually testing a
        pattern of thinking, logical deduction, and reading. It's about
        habit.

        -   skanik

            Lu Jing,

            Yes, the SAT reward those who are good at logical puzzles
            but\
             you have to solve those puzzles very quickly to have time
            to finish\
             the exam - those who are proficient at "guess and check"
            get\
             just as much credit for the "right" answer as those who
            solve\
             the actual problem - therein lies the problem.

-   Barry Ritholtz

    Rwminds me a bit of Frank Partnoy's book Wait: The Art and Science
    of Delay ([http://amzn.to/1cIG0EY](http://amzn.to/1cIG0EY))

-   ApathyNihilism

    After all, what's the rush?

[![A shy Yves Saint Laurent is pushed onstage to be acclaimed for his
Spring-Summer collection, Paris, January 1986. Photo by
Abbas/Magnum](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/07/Shyness-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/shyness-cannot-be-cured-it-is-part-of-being-human/)

The crystalline wall

Shyness is a part of being human. The world would be a more insipid,
less creative place without it

By Joe Moran 2,100 words

[![Illustration by Matt
Murphy](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2012/09/Final-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/society/steve-fleming-neuroscience-crime/)

Was it really me?

Neuroscience is changing the meaning of criminal guilt. That might make
us more, not less, responsible for our actions

By Steve Fleming 2,300 words

[![Illustration by Michael
Marsicano](http://cdn-imgs-mag.aeon.co/images/2013/08/TheSocialBrain-306x192.jpg)](http://aeon.co/magazine/philosophy/how-consciousness-works/)

How the light gets out

Consciousness is the ‘hard problem’, the one that confounds science and
philosophy. Has a new theory cracked it?

By Michael Graziano 3,400 words

![LOOKOUT-FINAL](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/LOOKOUT-FINAL.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/society/the-lookout-a-short-film-about-forest-fires-and-wilderness/)

The Lookout
===========

Both a person and a place, the forest fire lookout reminds us of the importance of wilderness
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Brian Bolster

16 minutes

![Encompassing-Light-final](http://aeon.co/film/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Encompassing-Light-final.jpg)
[](http://aeon.co/film/society/an-all-encompassing-light-a-short-film-about-hiroshima/)

An All-Encompassing Light
=========================

Hiroshima was bombed in 1945. The scars it left are still raw and shocking
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chloe White

21 minutes

More films

[](#)

### Like us on Facebook

[](https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=aeonmag)

### Follow us on Twitter

[](#email-signup)

### Sign up to our newsletter

[](http://aeon.co/magazine "Aeon")

Share

[](http://aeon.co/magazine/ "Aeon Magazine")

-   [About](http://aeon.co/magazine/about/ "About Aeon")
-   [Our writers](http://aeon.co/magazine/contributors/ "Our writers")
-   [Most popular](http://aeon.co/magazine/most-popular/ "Most Popular")
-   [Aeon Film](http://aeon.co/film "Aeon Film")

© Aeon Media Ltd. 2014 Designed by
[magCulture](http://magculture.com/projects/ "magCulture")
[Privacy](http://aeon.co/magazine/privacy-policy/ "Privacy policy")

Sign up for our Daily or Weekly newsletter

![image](http://googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/963777574/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![image](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1410387409226681&ev=NoScript)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://aeon.co/magazine/psychology/indecision-is-sometimes-the-best-way-to-decide/
