Menu

[Tech.pro](/)

-   [Create a
    Profile](/register?returnUrl=%2Ftutorial%2F1476%2Fpart-2-backbonejs-deconstructed&returnTitle=Part%202%3A%20Backbone.js%20Deconstructed)
    or
    [Login](http://tech.pro/login?returnUrl=%2ftutorial%2f1476%2fpart-2-backbonejs-deconstructed)

-   [Profile](http://tech.pro/register)
    -   [Create a Profile](/register)
    -   [Projects Directory](/projects)
    -   [How Tech.pro Works](/how-it-works)

-   [Network](http://tech.pro/profiles)
    -   [Search Pros](/profiles)
    -   [Companies](/companies)
    -   [My Network](/network)
    -   [Invite Your Peers](/account/build-network-start)

-   [Posts](http://tech.pro/posts)
    -   [Popular Authors](/authors)
    -   [Tutorials](/tutorials)
    -   [Blogs](/blogs)
    -   [Links](/links)
    -   [Post a Blog](/blogs/create)
    -   [Submit a Link](/links/submit)

-   [Q&A](http://tech.pro/questions)
    -   [Trending](/questions/trending)
    -   [Most Recent](/questions/new)
    -   [Ask a Question](/questions/ask)
    -   [Answer a Question](/questions/unanswered)

-   [More](http://tech.pro/about-us)
    -   [How Tech.pro Works](/how-it-works)
    -   [About Us](/about-us)
    -   [Contact Us](/contact-us)
    -   [Sitemap](/sitemap)

-   [Login](/login?returnUrl=%2Ftutorial%2F1476%2Fpart-2-backbonejs-deconstructed)
-   [Create a
    Profile](/register?returnUrl=%2Ftutorial%2F1476%2Fpart-2-backbonejs-deconstructed)

-   [How Tech.pro Works](/how-it-works)

-   

  ----------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------- -----------------------------
  ![image](//tpstatic.com/img/layout/techpro/joinBannerImage.png)   The nerd table is now the cool table.   [learn more](/how-it-works)
  ----------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------- -----------------------------

[![Cody
Lindley](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/0798df5e6e970c56326bd6ba8eb30ef3.png?d=retro&s=24)](http://tech.pro/codylindley)
[Cody Lindley](http://tech.pro/codylindley) \
 posted 8 months ago *K*

INTERMEDIATE

Part 2: Backbone.js Deconstructed
=================================

-   1 - [Article Overview](#article_overview)
-   2 - [Backbone.View](#backbone.view)
    -   2.1 - Conceptual Overview Of A `Backbone.View`
    -   2.2 - Subclassing and Creating a `Backbone.View`
    -   2.3 - Configuring A `Backbone.View` With Options
    -   2.4 - `Backbone.View` Methods, Properties, And Events
    -   2.5 - Running `initialize()` Function When Backbone View's Are
        Instantiated
    -   2.6 - Rendering A View
    -   2.7 - Connecting A View To An Element Node
    -   2.8 - Setting Element Attributes On An Element Node In Memory
    -   2.9 - Using The jQuery-Wrapped `el` Shortcut (aka `this.$el`)
    -   2.10 - Using the jQuery-Wrapped `el` Scoped Shortcut (aka
        `this.$()`)
    -   2.11 - Setting Delegated Events For A Backbone View Using The
        `events` Property
    -   2.12 - Setting The Element Node Associated With A View Using
        `setElement()`
    -   2.13 - Removing A View From The DOM Using `remove()`
    -   2.14 - Attaching Delegated Events Using `delegateEvents()`
    -   2.15 - Using Templates With Views

-   3 - [Backbone.Model](#backbone.model)
    -   3.1 - Conceptual Overview Of A `Backbone.Model`
    -   3.2 - Subclassing and Creating a `Backbone.Model`
    -   3.3 - `Backbone.Model` Methods, Properties, And Events
    -   3.4 - Setting Default Model Values/Attributes
    -   3.5 - Setting, Verifying, Getting, UnSetting, and Clearing Model
        Data
    -   3.6 - Accessing A Models Data/Attributes
    -   3.7 - Getting A Copy Of A Models Data/Attributes Using
        `toJSON()`
    -   3.8 - Filtering Model Data
    -   3.9 - Listening To Model `change` Events
    -   3.10 - Verify if a Model Has Changed And What Changed Using
        `hasChanged()` and `changedAttributes()`
    -   3.11 - Getting Previous Attribute Values Using `previous()` and
        `previousAttributes()`
    -   3.12 - Validating Model Data Before Its Set or Saved
    -   3.13 - Listening To A Model's `invalid` Event
    -   3.14 - Manually Run `validate` On Model

-   4 - [Backbone.Collection](#backbone.collection)
    -   4.1 - Conceptual Overview Of A `Backbone.Collection`
    -   4.2 - Creating a `Backbone.Collection` From Model Instances
    -   4.3 - Creating a `Backbone.Collection` From A Model Constructor
    -   4.4 - `Backbone.Collection` Methods, Properties, And Events
    -   4.5 - Getting All Model Data/Attributes Out Of A Collection
        Using `toJSON()`
    -   4.6 - Getting Models From A Collection Using `models`, `get()`,
        `at()`, `where()`, and `findWhere()`
    -   4.7 - Sorting A Collection
    -   4.8 - Getting an Array of Model Attributes And Values From Each
        Model in a Collection Using `Pluck()`
    -   4.9 - Adding Models To A Collection Using `add()`, `push()`,
        `unshift()`
    -   4.10 - Removing Models From A Collection Using `remove()`,
        `pop()`, `shift()`
    -   4.11 - Add, Merge, and Remove Models At The Same Time Using
        `set()`
    -   4.12 - Replacing All Models In (i.e. bulk replace/reset) A
        Collection Using `reset()`
    -   4.13 - Using underscore.js (or lodash.js) Methods On Models
        (i.e. `models`) In A Collection

-   5 - [Building A Simple Contacts
    Application](#building_a_simple_contacts_application)
    -   5.1 - Overview
    -   5.2 - Extend `Backbone.Model` creating `Contact`
        Constructor/Class
    -   5.3 - Instantiate `contacts` Collection, Passing it Model
        Constructor/Class And A Contact
    -   5.4 - Extend `Backbone.View` creating `AddContactsView` &
        Instantiate An Instance
    -   5.5 - Extend `Backbone.View` creating `ContactListView` &
        Instantiate An Instance
    -   5.6 - Working Demo

-   6 - [Conclusion](#conclusion)

1 - Article Overview
--------------------

In Part 1 of [Backbone.js
Deconstructed](http://tech.pro/tutorial/1367/part-1-backbonejs-deconstructed)
an in-depth review of the periphery Backbone parts was completed. If you
haven't read part 1, I'd suggest you start with part 1 before proceeding
with part 2. At the very least I would make sure you are comfortable
with the concepts discussed in [part 1, section 6, Constructing Backbone
Objects](http://tech.pro/tutorial/1367/part-1-backbonejs-deconstructed#constructing_backbone_objects).

In part 2 of Backbone.js Deconstructed, we will be examining the meat of
Backbone. The meat being Backbone, views, models, and collections.
Equipped with the knowledge conveyed in part 1, you should be adequately
prepared to get intimate with `Backbone.View`, `Backbone.Model` and
`Backbone.Collection` constructors and corresponding object instances.
Before we begin, I am going to lay out my strategy for discussing the
meat.

While it is common that most efforts to teach Backbone start with
learning about models, I actually think this prohibits learning. I
believe once the peripheral parts are understood, the easiest path for
grokking Backbone starts with the view. I strongly suggest a mastery of
views before you attempt to populate a view with data (i.e. models or
collections of models) and eventing the view to stay in sync with the
data. The plan is to first examine views, then models, then collections
in that order. Once each of these parts are understood, we will take
this knowledge and use it to examine a [small and contrived contact's
application](http://jsfiddle.net/codylindley/Qwb9r/). Don't be afraid to
examine [the application](http://jsfiddle.net/Qwb9r/) first, In fact I
recommend it, as it will give a helpful context before reading sections
2, 3, and 4.

> I have decided to write a Part 3 in this article series focusing on
> the syncing of model and collection data using a restful JSON api
> (i.e. fetch, save, destroy, sync). I did this to keep the complexity
> surrounding syncing (i.e. servers and api's) out of this article with
> the hope that this will shine a spotlight on the nature and function
> of views, models, and collections.

Let's get to it!

2 - Backbone.View
-----------------

**2.1 - Conceptual Overview Of A `Backbone.View`**

It is common to consider a view as an isolated region of a web
application. In other words, any logical chunk of the UI, when cutting
up the UI into smaller parts for development, can be considered a view.
Thus, think of a `Backbone.View` as the container (i.e. object) for the
JavaScript logic that renders and updates this isolated region. Note
that a `Backbone.View` does not store data or groups of data; it is
commonly the hub that references model(s) or collection(s) of data and
does something with that data.

If it helps, think of the view as the location in your code that brings
together and controls the following parts:

-   data (i.e. models or collection's of models)
-   HTML template
-   reference/hook into DOM element that contains the HTML markup
    forming the UI
-   events and functions driving the UI

The views' job, then, is to take these parts (i.e. data, template, DOM,
events) and render the UI region.

Here are some points to drill into your mind about Backbone views.

-   Backbone views contain all of the parts necessary to construct an
    isolated and logical region of a web application. `Backbone.View`
    objects glue together data, templates, events and the rendering and
    re-rendering logic that occurs when data changes.
-   Views do not have to be connect to a model or a collection (i.e.
    data). A view can simply manage an isolated and logical region of a
    web application.
-   It is common practice for a view to reference a template (i.e. the
    html). This might be a stretch for some considering that views
    typically are the template. This is not the case with Backbone
    views.

**2.2 - Subclassing and Creating a `Backbone.View`**

To create a generic view, we only need to instantiate an instance from
`Backbone.View`.

    var myView = new Backbone.View();

However, it is more likely that you will be extending/subclassing the
base `Backbone.View` before you instantiate an instance so that you can
add your own domain specific properties.

Below I extend the `Backbone.View` constructor creating a
sub-constructor (i.e. subclass) and define some contrived domain
specific properties for instances to inherit.

**Notes:**

-   View instances have an internal `cid` property (e.g.
    `myViewInstance.cid`), which is a unique identifier automatically
    assigned to view when they are created. This value is
    [derived](http://backbonejs.org/docs/backbone.html#section-120) from
    the `_.uniqueId('view')` method.

**2.3 - Configuring A `Backbone.View`** With Options

When you are extending or instantiating a view, you can pass the
following **special** properties, which are hijacked and purposed by
Backbone:

    //Extending a view

    var MyView = new Backbone.View.extend({

    model: {}, 
    events: {} || function(){return {}}
    collection: {}, 
    el: '' || function(){return ''}, 
    id: '', 
    className: '' || function(){return ''}, 
    tagName: '' || function(){return ''}, 
    attributes: {'attribute':'value','attribute':'value'}

    });

    //Instantiating a view

    var myView = new Backbone.View({

    model: {}, 
    events: {} || function(){return {}}
    collection: {}, 
    el: '' || function(){return ''}, 
    id: '', 
    className: '' || function(){return ''}, 
    tagName: '' || function(){return ''}, 
    attributes: {'attribute':'value','attribute':'value'}

    });

When the above special view options are passed as options during
instantiation, they become properties of the view instance as well as
properties of the `options` property. In the code below I demonstrate
access to both.

You should be aware that non-special (i.e. foo) options only show up in
the `options` property.

**2.4 - `Backbone.View` Methods, Properties, And Events**

Backbone view instances have the following [methods and
properties](http://backbonejs.org/#View):

-   el
-   $el
-   setElement()
-   attributes
-   $()
-   render()
-   remove()
-   delegateEvents()
-   undelegateEvents()

We will be examining all of the above methods and properties in this
section.

Additionally, views can make use of the following built-in event:

  event type   arguments passed to callback   description
  ------------ ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  `'all'`      event name                     this special event fires for *any* (i.e. not just built in events) triggered event, passing the event name as the first argument

**2.5 - Running `initialize()` Function When Backbone Views Are
Instantiated**

All view instances when instantiated will invoke an internal initialize
function that can be defined when extending `Backbone.View`. Below we
include an initialize function that runs when a view instance is
created.

The initialize function is an ideal place to house logic that needs to
run when view instances are created.

**Notes:**

-   The value of `this` inside of the initialize function is scoped to
    the `myViewInstance` that is created.
-   The initialize function commonly houses events which listen for
    changes on models and collections.

**2.6 - Rendering A View**

View objects come with a default
[render()](http://backbonejs.org/#View-render) method that is intended
to be overwritten. The render function, by design, is intended to house
the logic required to construct the view. In the code below I make use
of the initialize function to call the instances render function when it
is instantiated.

Not much rendering is occurring because we have yet to connect the view
to an element node, but clearly the `render` function should contain the
logic that constructs a view.

**Notes:**

-   It is not a bad idea to `return this` inside of the render function
    so that you can chain view methods. All of the built-in Backbone
    view methods follow this practice.

**2.7 - Connecting A View To An Element Node**

Backbone views are intended to be tied to an [element
node](http://domenlightenment.com/#3) which is literally either in the
html producing the UI or in memory. Typically, when instantiating a
view, either the `el` or `tagname` property is set connecting the view
instance to an element node. Below I demonstrate both of these
scenarios.

Connecting a view to an element node in the HTML page using a CSS
selector:

Connecting a view to an element node in memory:

You should note that connecting a view to an element node in memory will
still define an `el` property value. The idea is that `el` is always a
node. You can set it to reference a node in the html page using a css
selector or you can create an element node in memory by using the
`tagname` property. If you don't provide an `el` value or `tagname`
value when extending `Backbone.View` or instantiating a view the `el`
value will default to an empty `<div>` (i.e. `tagname:'div'`).

**Notes:**

-   The `el` property, when connecting a view to an element in the
    browser DOM, accepts either a css selector string (i.e. `'#myView'`)
    or a jQuery object itself (i.e. `jQuery('myView')`) wrapping a node
    element in the HTML document loaded into the browser.

**2.8 - Setting Element Attributes On An Element Node In Memory**

The view options `id`, `className`, and `attributes` provide properties
which add attribute values to the element node connect to a view [when
the `tagname` property is
used](http://backbonejs.org/docs/backbone.html#section-133). Below I use
all three of these special properties to set attribute values on the
node in memory that is connected to `myViewInstance`.

**Notes:**

-   The special properties `id`, `className`, and `attributes` do not
    work on nodes that are already in the HTML DOM.

**2.9 - Using The jQuery-Wrapped `el` Shortcut (aka `this.$el`)**

Regardless if the element connect to a view (i.e. `el`) is in memory or
in an the html page Backbone will setup a jQuery wrapper around the
element so that you don't have to. It is basically a shortcut for
creating your own wrapper around the element (i.e. `jQuery(this.el);`)
that the view is connected too. In the code example below I verify that
`this.$el` contains my `el` wrapped with jQuery methods.

**2.10 - Using the jQuery-Wrapped `el` Scoped Shortcut (aka
`this.$()`)**

Backbone provides [a short for performing jQuery functions scoped to the
element the view is connected
too](http://backbonejs.org/docs/backbone.html#section-125). This sounds
complicated but using `this.$()` is simply a shortcut for not having to
write `$(this.el).find()` or `this.$el.find()` every time you want to
perform jQuery tasks on element nodes contained in the view. In the code
below I make use of `this.$()` selecting the `<span>` contained inside
of `myViewInstance`.

Notice that by using `this.$()` we are confining our jQuery selecting to
the children element nodes of `el`. This is why the only `<span>` that
is given the bold CSS styling is contained inside of the `el` (i.e.
`<div id="myView"></div>`).

**2.11 - Setting Delegated Events For A Backbone View Using The `events`
Property**

Backbone will wire up events for a view, which are
[delegated](http://domenlightenment.com/#11.14) from the `el` node, from
an `events` object that can be set when extending the `Backbone.View` or
instantiating a view. In the code below I provide an events object when
extending `Backbone.View` that adds a `click` and `mouseover` event to
the `<button>` element in the view.

The format for defining the event and the node inside of the view (i.e.
inside of `el`) the event is attached, is as follows:

    // event: {'event selector' : 'callback function'}

    //Example based on previous JSFiddle below:

    'click button': 'sayHi'

    //notice the space divides the event from the selector

The event and the selector are the same values that jQuery normally
takes as parameters when using the
[jQuery().on()](http://api.jquery.com/on/) method to do event
delegation.

**Notes:**

-   If the selector is omitted, it is assumed by Backbone that the event
    should be bound directly to the `el` node. Behind the scenes this
    simply means the `jQuery.on()` is not passed a selector for event
    delegation.
-   The callback function associated with an event can either be a
    function value or the name of a view instance method as a string
    (e.g. `sayHi`).
-   Events are stored on view instances in an object called `events`.

**2.12 - Setting The Element Node Associated With A View Using
`setElement()`**

Using the `setElement()` method available to view instances we can
change the node element that is associated with the view. In the code
below `myViewInstance` is initially associated to the `<div>` in the
page with an id of "myView". Using the `setElement()` method the
`myViewInstance` view is set so that the node element that is associated
with the view is now the `<div>` with an id value of "anotherMyView".

When using the `setElement()` method on a view, you should keep in mind
that Backbone will remove any events on the previous element node and
set them up on the new node you are moving the view too (i.e.
`delegateEvents()` is called). In our code example above this would
explain why the second "Say Hi!" button is functional while no longer
responds to click events.

**2.13 - Removing A View From The DOM Using `remove()`**

The `Backbone.View` `remove()` method invokes the jQuery
[remove()](http://api.jquery.com/remove/) method on the element node
that is associated with the view. The reason that you'd pick this method
over simply calling the jQuery method (i.e. `this.$el.remove();`) is
that it will also call the `stopListening()` event on the view instance,
removing all listeners set on the view.

In the code example below I set up the rendered view to remove itself if
it is clicked. Clicking on the "invoke remove()" button will cause the
button itself to be removed.

**Notes:**

-   Remember the jQuery `remove()` event removes the element its call
    on, as well as everything inside, it.
-   Backbone relies on jQuery's `remove()` method which properly removes
    any events before any elements are removed.

**2.14 - Attaching Delegated Events Using `delegateEvents()`**

By default, Backbone will internally call `delegetEvents()` when a view
is instantiated, referencing the `events` option object for any events
that need to be setup. If, for whatever reason, the events attached to a
view are removed, consider the `delegateEvents()` method the tool for
refreshing/reattaching the events to the view.

To demonstrate the `delegateEvents()` method, in the code below, I
render a view without setting up events during extending or instantiate.
After the view is created, I update the views `events` property so that
the `sayHi` callback is invoked when the `<button>` is clicked. Then I
use the `delegateEvents()` method to attach any events in the events
object to my view.

**Notes:**

-   Calling `delegetEvents()` will remove all previous delegated event
    callbacks and then add them back. In a sense, a refresh.
-   To remove delegated events inside of views call the
    `undelegateEvents()` on the view instance.

**2.15 - Using Templates With Views**

Backbone does not force you into using a specific templating engine or
pattern for rendering a view. However, a templating solution for
rendering complicated bits of HTML from JSON data is provided by
[underscore.js](http://underscorejs.org/#template). I am showing a small
example of how templates in underscore.js (really lodash.underscore.js)
can be used.

Don't take the lack of in depth coverage on the topic of templates here
to indicate the commonality of templates. Templates, in fact, are common
if not almost always used when building Backbone applications. Really
any web application! When rendering a view a templating engine should
always be considered so that views do not become stuffed with DOM
manipulation logic.

3 - Backbone.Model
------------------

**3.1 - Conceptual Overview Of A `Backbone.Model`**

A Backbone Model is likened to a table structure with column headers and
rows of data. A `Backbone.Model` object defines the column labels and
wraps the data (i.e. attributes) in each row with pre-defined and custom
methods for data conversions, validations, and access control. Creating
model instances from `Backbone.Model` or an extended `Backbone.Model`,
provides the object to which the actual data is stored. For example, a
model for a contact in a contacts application might look something like
the following:

  first name   last name   phone
  ------------ ----------- --------------
  John         Doe         111-111-1111

You can think of a `Backbone.Model` constructor as the column headers
and the methods and properties common to each row of data. An instance
created from the constructor is likened to populating the above table
with actual data.

    //i.e.
    new Backbone.Model(
       {firstName:'John',lastName:'Doe',phone:'1-111-1111'}
    );

Keep in mind that out of the box `Backbone.Model` provides properties
and methods (e.g. `get('phone')`) for operating on each row and
facilitates the ability to define your own methods and properties (e.g.
`getFullName()`)

What's been summarized thus far is only part of the nature of a Backbone
model. In Backbone, the other part involves the logic for syncing data
over HTTP through a restful JSON api using AJAX. In this article we are
going to save the details pertaining to syncing for another time. This
article will focus on the life cycle of a model (and collection of
models) without clouding this objective with syncing.

**3.2 - Subclassing and Creating a `Backbone.Model`**

To create a generic model with data we only need instantiate an instance
from `Backbone.Model` and pass in the values (or what Backbone calls
`attributes`) the model will store. For example, below I create two
contact models, one for John Doe and the other for Jane Doe.

    var contact1Model = new Backbone.Model(
        {firstName:'John',lastName:'Doe',phone:'111-111-1111'}
    );

    var contact2Model = new Backbone.Model(
        {firstName:'Jane',lastName:'Doe',phone:'222-222-2222'}
    );

However, it's more likely that you will be extending/subclassing the
base `Backbone.Model` before you instantiate an instance so that you can
add your own domain specific properties.

Below I extend the `Backbone.Model` constructor, creating a
sub-constructor, (i.e. `ContactModel`) and define the `getFullName()`
method so all models created from `ContactModel` inherit the
`getFullName()` method.

Notes:

-   An array of data can be passed in place of an object when
    instantiating a model. When this is done Backbone will convert the
    array to an object by giving numeric property names to the values
    passed (i.e. `['foo','bar']` becomes `{'1':'foo','2','bar'}`).
-   The second argument that can be passed when instantiating a model,
    is an options object containing the options `collection`, `url`,
    `urlRoot`, and `parse` options. Most of these will be addressed in
    the next article given that they are related to syncing.
-   Don't forget about the `initialize` function, which can be set up
    when extending models. This is an ideal place to house logic that
    needs to run when model instances are created. Especially
    considering that the `this` value inside of the initialize function
    is scope to the instance created.
-   A convenient `clone()` method is available on model instances that\
     will return a new instance of a model with a copy of the data the\
     `clone()` method is called on. It is a handy way of creating a
    model from a model instance.

**3.3 - `Backbone.Model` Methods, Properties, And Events**

Backbone model instances have the following [methods and
properties](http://backbonejs.org/#View):

-   get
-   set
-   escape
-   has
-   unset
-   clear
-   id
-   idAttribute
-   cid
-   attributes
-   changed
-   defaults
-   toJSON
-   **sync**
-   **fetch**
-   **save**
-   destroy
-   Underscore Methods:
    -   keys
    -   values
    -   pairs
    -   invert
    -   pick
    -   omit

-   validate
-   validationError
-   isValid
-   **url**
-   **urlRoot**
-   **parse**
-   clone
-   **isNew**
-   **hasChanged**
-   changedAttributes
-   previous
-   previousAttributes

The methods and properties in **bold** will not be discussed in this
article. In the next article we will deal with the methods and
properties in bold that pertain to syncing.

Additionally, models can make use of the following built-in events:

  event type               arguments passed to callback   description
  ------------------------ ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  `'all'`                  event name                     this special event fires for *any* (i.e. not just built in events) triggered event, passing the event name as the first argument
  `'change'`               model, options                 when a model's attributes have changed.
  `'change:[attribute]'`   model, value, options          when a specific attribute has been updated.
  `'destroy'`              model, collection, options     when a model is [destroyed](http://backbonejs.org/#Model-destroy).
  `'error'`                model, xhr, options            when a model's [save](http://backbonejs.org/#Model-save) call fails on the server.
  `'invalid'`              model, error, options          when a model's [validation](http://backbonejs.org/#Model-validate) fails on the client.
  `'request'`              model, xhr, options            when a model or collection has started a request to the server.
  `'sync'`                 model, resp, options           when a model (or collection) has been successfully synced with the

**3.4 - Setting Default Model Values/Attributes**

When extending a model, you can provide a set of default values that are
shared among all instances. In the code below I setup a default value
for `firstName` and `lastName`.

If you would prefer that instances not reference the same default
object, you can provide a function value for defaults that will create
unique default values (i.e. not referencing that same default object).

In the code example above, each instance will now make use of a unique
`defaults` object, instead of each instance referencing the same
`defaults` object.

**3.5 - Setting, Verifying, Getting, UnSetting, and Clearing Model
Data**

Backbone provides a generic set of methods (`set()`, `has()`, `get()`,
`unset()`, `clear()`) for working with model data. Below I demonstrate
each of these methods.

Notes:

-   These methods should be used instead of directly editing the
    internal `attributes` object so the built in events on models can be
    triggered appropriately.
-   The `set()`, `unset()`, and `clear()` methods invoke the internal
    `change` event.
-   The `set()` method accepts an options object (e.g.
    `set({'name':'value','name':'value'})`) or two string parameters
    (e.g. `set('name','value')`).
-   The `set()`, `unset()`, and `clear()` methods all accept the
    `{silent: true}` option which stops any Backbone built-in event form
    firing.
-   The option `{validate:true}` can be used with the `set()` method to
    validate any values before they are set (e.g.
    `set({'foo':'foo'},{validate:true})`).

**3.6 - Accessing A Models Data/Attributes**

Backbone provides the `attributes` property which gives direct access to
the internal object containing a models data.

While Backbone provides direct access to this object, it is not common
for this object to be manipulated directly. In fact, don't do it. If you
want to edit model data use `set()`, `get()`, `unset()`, `clear()` or
make a copy (e.g. `model.toJSON();`) of the `attributes` object, edit
that, then update the model using `set()`.

**Notes:**

-   Direct Manipulation of the `attributes` property will not invoke
    internal model events.

**3.7 - Getting A Copy Of A Models Data/Attributes Using `toJSON()`**

The `toJSON()` model method returns a copy of the `attributes` internal
data object.

This can be handy when you need a clean copy of the object for a
template.

**Notes:**

-   The `toJSON()` method makes a shallow copy (i.e.
    [\_.clone](http://underscorejs.org/#clone)) of the attributes
    object. Any nested object or arrays will be referenced from
    original, not copied.
-   Passing a model instance to `JSON.stringify` will internally use the
    Backbone `toJSON()` method.

**3.8 - Filtering Model Data**

Backbone proxies 6 methods (`keys()`, `values()`, `pairs()`, `invert()`,
`pick()`, `omit()`) from the underscore.js library to be used directly
on model data. These functions provide aid when filtered states of model
data are needed. Below I demonstrate the four most used methods.

**3.9 - Listening To Model `change` Events**

Anytime a change occurs with a model's data a `change` event is
broadcasted so that typically a view can listen for such an event.

In the following code example, a model is created and then a view is
created to listen for changes on the model using the `change` event. Any
changes to the model data will trigger a `change` event and then ideally
a re-render.

It is possible to listen only for a specific attribute change in a model
by indicating the name of the attribute along with the change event when
the event listener is setup (i.e. `'change:[ATTRIBUTE]'`). For example,
in the code below, I have changed the previous code example to only
listen for changes on the `firstName` attribute in the contact model.

**3.10 - Verify if a Model Has Changed And What Changed Using
`hasChanged()` and `changedAttributes()`**

The `hasChanged()` and `changedAttributes()` model methods provide the
ability to determine if something has changes since that last `change`
event and specifically what changed.

In the following code, I set up a contact model and then immediately
changed the phone number attribute.

By changing the phone number in the above code example, the internal
`change` event is called for the first time and the `hasChanged()`
method will return a boolean indicating that the model has changed. To
get an object containing the attributes that have change invoke the
`changedAttibutes()` method on the model.

**3.11 - Getting Previous Attribute Values Using `previous()` and
`previousAttributes()`**

The `previous()` and `previousAttributes()` method can be used to get
the value of an attribute prior to the last `change` event. In the
following code example, I set up a contact model, change the `phone` and
`firstName` attributes and then use the `previous()` and
`previousAttributes()` method to retrieve the prior value for the phone
attribute and the state of all mode attributes before the last change
event.

**3.12 - Validating Model Data Before Its Set or Saved**

When setting or saving model data (we will talk about saving in the next
article) a validation function can be invoked on the data validating its
quality before anything is set or saved.

By default, the `validate` property is left undefined. To define a
validate function on a model pass
`validate:function(attributes,options){}` to `extend()` or directly
update the `validate` property on a model instance. To trip a validation
error simply return any value from the function except `false`.

In the code below, I set up a validation function for phone numbers and
make sure any invalid phones numbers can not be `set()`.

The last value returned from the validation function that is not false,
can be referenced from the models `validationError` property. In the
code above we return an invalid message from the validation function and
then accessed the `validationError` property to log this message.

**Notes:**

-   A `validate` callback function is sent all of the models attributes
    as the first parameter, and the second parameter contains the
    options object from the `set()` or `save()` methods that trip the
    validation.
-   Validation only occurs when using `save()`, the `set()` method and
    the `validation:true` option, or by manually running validation
    using `isValid()`.

**3.13 - Listening To A Model's `invalid` Event**

The built in `invalid` event will be broadcasted when a model's
`validate` function fails. In the code below I demonstrate listening for
this event and then log the parameters passed to the invalid callback
function.

**3.14 - Manually Run `validate` On Model**

The `validate` function can be manually invoked by calling the
`isValid()` method. In the code example below the `validate` function is
set up when extending the `Backbone.model` constructor so that all model
instances can make use of the validate function. To make sure that data
is always validated, I am running the `validate` function when the
`initialize` function is called to catch any invalid data that is passed
during the creation of the model instance.

Notice that the `isValid()` method returns a helpful boolean indicating
if the model is valid or not.

**Notes:**

-   The `save()` and `set()` internally make use of the validate
    function.

4 - Backbone.Collection
-----------------------

**4.1 - Conceptual Overview Of A `Backbone.Collection`**

A Backbone collection represents a logical grouping of models and
provides methods and properties for working with (grouping, sorting,
filtering) these groups of models. To finalize the contact illustration
I have been using in this article (i.e. a model = row of labeled data
for a contact in a table), you can think of a collection as the entire
table that contains rows of contact data. Below I have updated the table
containing contact details discussed at the start of the model section
so that the entire table can be considered a contacts table.

Contacts:

first name

last name

phone

John

Doe

111-111-1111

Of course, a `Backbone.Collection` is much more than a label like the
previous table might express. Collections can capture events (change,
destroy, request, sync, error, invalid) that are triggered on its models
and collections also have their own set of useful events (e.g. add,
remove, reset, sort, request, sync).

**Notes:**

-   In its simplest form, a collection is simply an array of references
    to model instances. In fact, each collection instance provides a
    `models` property which is a direct reference to the internal array
    that contains the model instances.

**4.2 - Creating a `Backbone.Collection` From Model Instances**

To create a generic collection we only need instantiate an instance from
`Backbone.Collection` and pass in during instantiation an array of model
instances. In the code example I take the contact models we have been
working with in this article and pass them as the first option when
creating a collection.

Notes:

-   The first parameter passed when instantiating a collection can be a
    model instance or an array of model instances. However, if the
    collection being created has a reference (via `model` property) to a
    model constructor, the collection can internally instantiate models
    by passing a raw attribute/data object or an array of raw
    attributes/data objects.
-   The second parameter passed to a collection constructor is an
    options object configuring the `url`, `model`, and `comparator`
    options.
-   Just like `Backbone.View` and `Backbone.Model` a
    `Backbone.Collection` can be extended (i.e. subclassed) using
    `extend()` and defining an `initialize` function when extending will
    be invoked when a collection is created.
-   A `clone()` method is provided for creating collection objects by
    cloning a collection instance. When `clone()` is used a new
    collection instance is returned containing the same models.
-   A `length` property, available on collection instances, maintains
    the number of models it contains.
-   When a model is added to a collection, the model's `collection`
    property is automatically update to contain a reference to the
    collection.

**4.3 - Creating a `Backbone.Collection` From A Model Constructor**

A common pattern for creating collections is to point the collection
`model` property at a model constructor and then instead of passing an
array of references to model instances, the collection itself can
instantiate models from raw data and store these instances in the
collection. In the code below an array of raw data and a model
constructor (i.e. `ContactModel`) is passed to the `Backbone.Collection`
constructor when instantiating a collection.

The results are exactly the same as passing in a reference(s) to models
already created, but by using the `model` property the collections can
do some of the setup for us.

Notes:

-   The `model` property can also be set when sub-classing the
    `Backbone.Collection` constructor (e.g.
    `ContactsCollection = Backbone.Collections.extend({model:modelConstructor})`
-   The `model` property can either point to a model constructor or be a
    function value that returns a model instance

**4.4 - `Backbone.Collection` Methods, Properties, And Events**

Backbone collection instances have the following [methods and
properties](http://backbonejs.org/#View):

-   model
-   models
-   toJSON
-   **sync**
-   Underscore Methods (28)
-   add
-   remove
-   reset
-   set
-   get
-   at
-   push
-   pop
-   unshift
-   shift
-   slice
-   length
-   comparator
-   sort
-   pluck
-   where
-   findWhere
-   **url**
-   **parse**
-   clone
-   **fetch**
-   **create**

The methods and properties in bold will not be discussed in this
article. In the next article we will deal with the methods and
properties in bold that pertain to syncing.

Additionally, collections can make use of the following built-in events:

  event type    arguments passed to callback   description
  ------------- ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  `'all'`       event name                     this special event fires for *any* (i.e. not just built in events) triggered event, passing the event name as the first argument
  `'add'`       model, collection, options     when a model is added to a collection
  `'remove'`    model, collection, options     when a model is removed from a collection
  `'reset'`     collection, options            when the collection's entire contents have been replaced.
  `'sort'`      collection, options            when the collection has been re-sorted
  `'request'`   model, xhr, options            when a model or collection has started a request to the server.
  `'sync'`      model, resp, options           when a model (or collection) has been successfully synced with the

**Notes:**

-   Because collections contain models, any event that is triggered on a
    model will also be triggered on the collection. This means you can
    listen for the model `change`, `change[:attribute]`, `destroy`,
    `error`, and `invalid` event on a collection (e.g.
    `contacts.on('change',function(model,options){}`).

**4.5 - Getting All Model Data/Attributes Out Of A Collection Using
`toJSON()`**

The collection `toJSON()` method will return an array containing a copy
of the internal attributes for each model in a collection. In the code
below I log an array that contains all of the attributes for each model
in the collection using `toJSON()`.

**4.6 - Getting Models From A Collection Using `models`, `get()`,
`at()`, `where()`, and `findWhere()`**

Direct access to the array that contains all the model references for a
collection is provided by the`models` property. We have used this
property already in this section, but to demonstrate its value, examine
the code example below which extracts the array of model instances (i.e.
model objects) from a collection using the `models` property.

The `where()` method is provided so that the `models` array can be
filtered by attributes. In the code example below I use `where()` to get
an array of only the models in the collection that have an attribute of
`{firstName:'Doe'}`;

Using the `get()`, `at()`, and `findWhere()` collection methods we can
get a single model reference instead of an array of model references.
These three methods are demonstrated in the code below.

**Notes:**

-   Manipulating a collections module by making direct changes to the
    `models` array should be avoided given that doing so will not
    trigger events such as `add` or `remove`. Its better to use
-   The `findWhere()` will return the first match found in the
    collection.
-   `at()` will honor sorting order done on collections or return the
    model based on insertion order
-   Collection's have a `slice()` method that [is a
    shortcut](http://backbonejs.org/docs/backbone.html#section-98) for
    simply doing `models.slice(begin,end)`.

**4.7 - Sorting A Collection**

By default a collection does not sort itself. Models are simply in the
order that you add them. To have a collection keep a sort order the
`comparator` property should be defined as a
[sortBy](http://underscorejs.org/#sortBy) function taking a single
argument, as a
[sort](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort?redirectlocale=en-US&redirectslug=JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort)
function taking two arguments, or as a string indicating the attribute
to sort by. In the code example below we pass the comparator value
during collection creation so that the collection will keep models
sorted by `firstName`.

**Notes:**

-   Changes to a collection (i.e. `add()`) will automatically invoke the
    sorting logic defined by `comparator`. However, if the `attributes`
    in a model change, you will have to manually sort the collection
    using the `sort()` method to keep the collection updated and
    correctly sorted.
-   Calling `sort()` triggers a `sort` event on collections.
-   The comparator value can be set after the creation of a collection
    by defining a sort value (i.e. sort, or sortBy function, or
    attribute to sort by) for the collection's `comparator` value.

**4.8 - Getting an Array of Model Attributes And Values From Each Model
in a Collection Using `Pluck()`**

The `pluck()` method is extremely handy for creating an array of all of
the values for a specific attribute in a collection of models. For
example, in the code below I set up a collection with three models, that
all contain a `firstName` attribute. To extract the `firstName` value
for each model I call the `pluck('firstName')` method on the collection.

**4.9 - Adding Models To A Collection Using `add()`, `push()`,
`unshift()`**

The `add()` method for adding models to a collection can add a single
instance of a model or an array of model instances. If the collection
has a value for its `model` property, you can pass raw data/attribute
objects or an array of raw data attribute objects. In the code example
below I demonstrate all of these methods for adding a model to a
collection.

The `push()` and `unshift()` methods function identically to the `add()`
method, and taking the same parameters, except that these methods will
either add the model(s) to the end (i.e. `push()`) of the collection or
to the beginning (i.e. `unshift()`) of the collection.

**Notes:**

-   Passing the `{at: index}` option to `add()` as the second parameter
    will splice the added model(s) into the collection at a specific
    index.
-   Adding a model to a collection twice (i.e. same model) will
    basically do nothing. The model is ignored, unless you pass the
    `{merge:true}` option as the second parameter to the `add()` method.
    If a merge occurs the `change` event will be triggered on the model
    and collection.
-   The `add` event is triggered on a collection when a model is added,
    pushed, or shifted to the collection.

**4.10 - Removing Models From A Collection Using `remove()`, `pop()`,
`shift()`**

The `remove()` method can be used to remove a model(s) from a collection
by passing references to the models that need to be removed. Below I
demonstrate the removal of a single model as well as a group of models
from a collection.

The `pop()` and `shift()` are shortcut methods for removing models.
Calling `pop()` will remove the last model and `shift()` will remove the
first model.

**Notes:**

-   Calling `remove()` with no parameters will **not** remove all
    models. To remove all models from a collection call the `reset()`,
    passing it no arguments. (*HUH?*)
-   A `remove` event is triggered on the collection when the `remove()`,
    `pop()`, or `shift()` methods are invoked.

**4.11 - Add, Merge, and Remove Models At The Same Time Using `set()`**

The `set()` method will update the state of the models in a collection
by attempting to match the changes indicated by the array of model
instances passed to the `set()` method. In other words, using `set()`
will attempt to synchronize the array of models passed in with the
internal state of the models in the collection by intelligently
deciphering the differences and adding, removing, and merging according
to the differences.

In the code example below I set up a collection and then using `set()` I
add to the collection, remove a model from the collection, and update a
model in the collection all using `set()`.

Notes:

-   The `add`, `remove`, and `change` events are all triggered when
    using `set()` on the model and the collection objects.
-   To disable the add, remove, or merge functionality of `set()` you
    can pass it the options `{add: false}`, `{remove: false}`, or
    `{merge: false}`.

**4.12 - Replacing All Models In (i.e. bulk replace/reset) A Collection
Using `reset()`**

The `reset()` method can be used to replace the models in a collection
with a new set of model(s). It is essentially like removing all model(s)
in a collection and adding a new model(s).

**Notes:**

-   Calling `reset()` with no arguments will remove all of the models
    from the collection.
-   When the `reset()` method is used a `reset` event is triggered.

**4.13 - Using underscore.js (or lodash.js) Methods On Models (i.e.
`models`) In A Collection**

A collection instance has access to many useful methods for operating on
the array of models the collection instance contains. But you should be
aware that [Backbone mixes into to the prototype chain of a
collection](http://backbonejs.org/docs/backbone.html#section-116) the
following underscore.js (or lodash.js) methods which can be useful as
well. (e.g. `myCollectionInstance.first()` same as
`myCollectionInstance.at(0)`).

-   forEach or each
-   map or collect
-   reduce or foldl or inject)
-   reduceRight or foldr
-   find or detect
-   filter or select
-   reject
-   every or all
-   some or any
-   contains or include
-   invoke
-   max
-   min
-   sortBy
-   groupBy
-   sortedIndex
-   shuffle
-   toArray
-   size
-   first or head or take
-   initial
-   rest or tail
-   last
-   without
-   indexOf
-   lastIndexOf
-   isEmpty
-   chain

In the code example below I make use of the `each()` and `first()`.

5 - Building A Simple Contacts Application
------------------------------------------

**5.1 - Overview**

Imagine for a moment that you are in your favorite spreadsheet tool. You
create a spreadsheet called "contacts" (i.e. a collection). Next you
define column headers in the spreadsheet, so you add the headers "first
name", "last name" and "phone" (i.e. a model). Basically what you have
is a spreadsheet housing contact data (i.e. {firstName:'Jane,
lastName:'Doe', phone:'111-111-1111'}). Now, imagine you want to use
this information from the spreadsheet to create a UI (i.e. a view) to
view/add/delete contacts. Backbone can do that! Let's do it.

**5.2 - Extend `Backbone.Model` creating `Contact` Constructor/Class**

    var Contact = Backbone.Model.extend({
        defaults: {
            firstName: null,
            lastName: null,
            phone: null
        },
        getFullName: function(){
            return this.get('firstName') +' '+ this.get('lastName');
        }
    });

**5.3 - Instantiate `contacts` Collection, Passing A Model
Constructor/Class and A Contact**

    var contacts = new Backbone.Collection({ //seed it with some data
        firstName: 'Jane',
        lastName: 'Doe',
        phone: '111-111-1111'
    }, {
        model: Contact
    });

**5.4 - Extend `Backbone.View` creating `AddContactsView` & Instantiate
An Instance**

    var ContactListView = Backbone.View.extend({
        el: '#contacts',
        events: {
            'click li button': 'removeContact'
        },
        initialize: function () {
            this.render(); //render list
            this.listenTo(contacts, 'add remove', this.render); //the magic
        },
        removeContact: function (e) {
            $(e.target).parent('li').remove();
            contacts.findWhere({
                firstName: $(e.target).parent('li').find('span').text().split(' ')[0].trim(),
                lastName: $(e.target).parent('li').find('span').text().split(' ')[1].trim()
            }).destroy(); //this will invoke the internal 'remove' event
        },
        render: function () {
            if (contacts.length > 0) {
                this.$el.empty();
                contacts.each(function (contact) {
                    this.$el.append('<li><span>' + contact.getFullName() + '</span>'+' / '+ contact.get('phone') + '<button type="button" class="btn-xs btn-danger removeContactBtn">X</button></li>');
                }, this);
            }
        }
    });
    var contactListViewInstance = new ContactListView();

**5.5 - Extend `Backbone.View` creating `ContactListView` & Instantiate
An Instance**

    var AddContactsView = Backbone.View.extend({
        el: 'fieldset',
        events: {
            'click button': 'addContact'
        },
        addContact: function () {
            var firstName = this.$('#firstName').val();
            var lastName = this.$('#lastName').val();
            var phone = this.$('#phone').val();
            if (firstName && lastName && phone) {
                contacts.add({ //this will invoke the Backbone internal 'add' event
                    firstName: firstName,
                    lastName: lastName,
                    phone: phone
                });
                this.$('input').val('');
            }
        }
    });
    var addContactsViewInstance = new AddContactsView();

**5.6 - Working Demo**

Below is a working demo of the contacts application discussed in this
section. Examine the application code until a complete understanding of
the role and function each part (i.e. model, collection, views) plays in
the creation of the application. Refer back to section 2, 3, or 4 of
this article as needed.

6 - Conclusion
--------------

It was the intention of this article to give the reader a thorough
understanding of a Backbone view, model, and collection. In the next
part of this article we'll examine
[syncing](http://backbonejs.org/#Sync) and the methods associated with
syncing models and collections to a backend.

[Tech.pro](http://tech.pro/)

Unlike this Like this post

* * * * *

-   -   -   

### Login

Login

### Register

I agree to [Tech.pro's Terms](/terms-and-conditions) and have read the
[Privacy Policy](/privacy) Register

### Comments ()

-   [![Pedro
    Pinto](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/0f72619acd2d609df9b46fd1f0a2046f.png?d=retro&s=48)](http://tech.pro/pedropinto)
    [Pedro Pinto](http://tech.pro/pedropinto) posted 7 months ago

    Great article. Very useful for a person that's learning Backbone.

    When do you plan to publish the part 3?

    Thanks!

    *i* Reply

-   [![Eryan
    Cobham](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/4b6b1e4da37cbfd6c0f7a4490e3cb656.png?d=retro&s=48)](http://tech.pro/littlelazer)
    [Eryan Cobham](http://tech.pro/littlelazer) posted 8 months ago

    I think you might have a typo in the second note for Section 3.5. It
    doesn't look like the using the .get() method on a model invokes the
    internal 'change' event. See http://jsfiddle.net/Sa6tJ/1/

    *i* Reply

    -   [![Cody
        Lindley](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/0798df5e6e970c56326bd6ba8eb30ef3.png?d=retro&s=30)](http://tech.pro/codylindley)
        [Cody Lindley](http://tech.pro/codylindley) 8 months ago

        Thanks. Fixed now. And you are correct, get() should not have
        been listed there.

Likes

8

Views

5.1k

About the Author

[![Cody
Lindley](//www.gravatar.com/avatar/0798df5e6e970c56326bd6ba8eb30ef3.png?d=retro&s=36)](http://tech.pro/codylindley)

[Cody Lindley](http://tech.pro/codylindley)

Follow

\

Front-End/UI/JS Engineer & Author. Lover of Christ, people, logic & the
dying art of debate, conversation, & rational thinking. Husband & father
of 3.

* * * * *

### Want to write with us?

Anyone can write at Tech.pro. Writing at Tech.pro can help you get
recognized, spread knowledge, and inspire others. \
 [Write with us](/register)

### Invite a Friend

Tech.pro is a communications platform and will become more useful to you
as your colleagues join the site. Go ahead and invite a few today and
start reaping the benefits of membership.

[Invite a Friend](/account/invite-others)

### Tech.pro Daily Email

Get the latest content from Tech.pro delivered to your Inbox each day.
Simply create an account to subscribe. \
 [Subscribe](http://tech.pro/register)

[](http://tech.pro/)

Copyright © 2014 Tech.pro

-   [Feed](http://tech.pro/)
-   [Tutorials](http://tech.pro/tutorials)
-   [Blogs](http://tech.pro/blogs)
-   [Links](http://tech.pro/links)
-   [Q&A](http://tech.pro/questions)
-   [Invite Others](http://tech.pro/account/build-network-start)

-   [Network](http://tech.pro/profiles)
-   [Profiles](http://tech.pro/profiles)
-   [Authors](http://tech.pro/authors)
-   [Projects](http://tech.pro/projects)
-   [Companies](http://tech.pro/companies)
-   [My Network](http://tech.pro/network)

-   [More](http://tech.pro/how-it-works)
-   [How Tech.pro Works](http://tech.pro/how-it-works)
-   [About Us](http://tech.pro/about-us)
-   [Contact Us](http://tech.pro/contact-us)
-   [Privacy](http://tech.pro/privacy)
-   [Site Map](http://tech.pro/sitemap)

-   [Blog](http://blog.tech.pro)
-   [Twitter](http://twitter.com/techdotpro)
-   [Linkedin](http://www.linkedin.com/company/tech.pro-)
-   [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/TechDotPro)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://tech.pro/tutorial/1476/part-2-backbonejs-deconstructed
