[Lambda the Ultimate]()
=======================

![The Programming Languages Weblog](themes/chameleon/ltu/tagline.png)

****

[![image](/misc/xml.gif)](/rss.xml)

[Home](/)

[Feedback](/node/view/34)

[FAQ](/node/view/40)

[Getting Started](node/view/492)

[Discussions](/forum/1)

[Site operation discussions](/forum/2)

[Recent Posts](/tracker)

[(new topic)](/node/add/forum/1)

[Departments](/node/view/49)

[Courses](/node/view/2)

[Research Papers](/node/view/4)

[Design Docs](/node/view/3)

[Quotations](/node/view/5)

[Genealogical Diagrams](/node/view/7)

[Archives](/classic/lambda-archive1.html)

* * * * *

User login
----------

Username:\

Password:\

-   [Create new account](user/register "Create a new user account.")
-   [Request new
    password](user/password "Request new password via e-mail.")

Navigation
----------

-   [recent posts](tracker)

[Home]() » [forums](forum) » [LtU Forum](forum/1)

A functional-programming view of time
-------------------------------------

See fig. 3.38 in SICP, where the authors show a model of a joint bank
account shared by two people, Paul and Peter. The bank account can be
modeled as a process that operates on a stream of transactions and
generates a stream of responses. But the difficulty is merging the
individual streams of transactions by Paul and Peter in a purely
functional style. They argue that one can't get away from explicit
synchronization. They end this this chapter by pointing out the
essential difference between the two views of modeling of the world: as
a set of interacting stateful objects vs a single timeless stateless
entity. They say "A grand unification has yet to emerge". IIRC this part
has not changed between the first and second edition of SICP. [This is
probably confusing so you might wish to read this last section of
chapter 3 in the online copy of SICP, or view the very excellent video
lecture 6B from MIT opencourseware @ about 52 minutes. The Q&A at the
end is also relevant]

I am wondering if things have changed since then. I doubt FPLs can allow
modeling such a merge but how far have we come? Can we express
synchronization in some way in FPLs? Is there a grand unification of
something like CSP and FPL? Are SICP authors looking at this the wrong
way?

By [Bakul Shah](user/8829 "View user profile.") at 2010-10-08 18:37 |
[LtU Forum](taxonomy/term/1) | [previous forum
topic](node/4106 "Programming languages with higher kinds?") | [next
forum
topic](node/4103 "Intel&#039;s Array Building Blocks (was Rapidmind) : What do the purists and pragmatists think?")
| [other
blogs](http://www.technorati.com/search/lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4099 "Technorati search of other blogs commenting on this post.")
| 4530 reads

Comment viewing options
-----------------------

Flat list - collapsed Flat list - expanded Threaded list - collapsed
Threaded list - expanded Date - newest first Date - oldest first 10
comments per page 30 comments per page 50 comments per page 70 comments
per page 90 comments per page 150 comments per page 200 comments per
page

Select your preferred way to display the comments and click "Save
settings" to activate your changes.

### [Functional reactive](node/4099#comment-62133)

Functional reactive programming?

By [Sean McDirmid](user/1852 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09
00:42 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [Functional Reactive Programming](node/4099#comment-62134)

FRP achieves a great deal of concurrency, synchronization, and
coordination of behaviors within a pure functional system. This is
achieved, essentially, by fusing explicit temporal logic with the
functions: instead of `(d→r)` you essentially use `((t→d)→(t→r))`. Time
is explicit and monotonic, and thus allows other behavior to be
expressed in non-monotonic, concurrent, continuous, incremental,
reactive and interactive manners. If you want real-time and
deterministic programming, you can precisely control logical latencies
in order to mask the physical latencies and compute costs. FRP is very
elegant, and has been developed considerably since about 1998. For more
on the subject, I'll direct you to an [explanation by Conall Elliott on
Stack
Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1028250/what-is-functional-reactive-programming),
which has its own links. Google will also return plenty.

Now, I pulled out my copy of SICP to take a look at the problem you
describe. SICP describes in Chapter 3.5 the use of atemporal streams,
which aren't quite what is necessary for concurrency. With today's
hindsight from FRP, I find it a little cute that chapter 3.4 discusses
how "Time is of the Essence" but never once introduces it explicitly! In
particular time is kept 'implicit' to stateful operations. (State has a
before & after, therefore state implicitly has time.) Chapter 3.5 ends
with your example, but still keeps time 'implicit', even using the words
"hidden-time".

FRP makes time explicit, unhidden. It provides a "grand unification", at
least for *modeling* the world, as mentioned at the end of SICP.

FRP is a lot weaker for actually interacting with the world in an open,
modular way. The trouble is that open (pluggable) modularity needs
another property associated with state: identity. FRP handles time
excellently, but doesn't even bother with identity.

Explicit temporal properties have enhanced many other paradigms: logic
programming, concurrent constraint programming, etc.
[UTCC](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/3941) basically adds identity
and time to concurrent constraint programming. My
[RDP](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ReactiveDemandProgramming) adds identity
and open modularity to FRP. (And I'm still figuring out whether I can
also add constraint-programming to FRP, e.g. via [generative
grammars](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4012).)

[Seems Sean provided a pithy answer while I wrote this. :-]

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 00:45
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [Surely, researching FRP](node/4099#comment-62137)

Surely researching FRP should be the next stop for the poster, I'm not
sure if it was useful to add anything more than that (other than to talk
about my opinions on FRP again :) ). Its amazing how great a read the
SICP is considering its age (\~1984).

I'm not sure that its accurate to say that FRP makes time explicit...you
don't exactly get access to a reified clock as you might in a temporal
or synchronous program language. Rather the main value to me is the way
that FRP abstracts over time; e.g., property 'a' has the same meaning
regardless over time of what value it is assigned to at a particular
point in time, so we can talk about 'a + b' as an expression whose
evaluation can also change over time. Of course, FRP is more than that
(see Conal's explanation), and "abstracting over time" can be shared by
other paradigms...like constraint systems (again, as mentioned by
David).

FRP is also less than satisfying in complete programs: as an abstraction
it works very well in some places but breaks down completely in other
places. David mentioned identity, I would mention computations that
evolve state over time in a non-functional way, like physics. This is
why we keep looking for the best way to deal with state and time.

By [Sean McDirmid](user/1852 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09
02:48 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [Explicit delay, Integration](node/4099#comment-62139)

You have explicit time if you can describe a behavior or event in terms
of specific times (t=20,t=40) or in terms of relative times (t+20). Many
FRP designs support this. If you have integration, you get time as
well... because the integration of 1 over time is time.

You also have explicit time if you're free to peek at the past or future
of a value. Not all FRP implementations support that, since they are
purely functional and one will usually need to wait on a future to see
what happens. My temporal RDP does allow peeking at the 'anticipated'
future, which offers some interesting properties for intelligent
reaction.

Explicit time doesn't need to mean an explicit clock. :-)

*I would mention computations that evolve state over time in a
non-functional way, like physics.*

FRP as supported in Haskell is good at evolving state over time. Numeric
integration evolves state over continuous time, and "Switchers" evolve
state over discrete events.

My bet is that you could do an excellent physics simulation in Haskell's
FRP, and even include user input.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 04:11
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [I'm not aware of any](node/4099#comment-62140)

I'm not aware of any specific FRP implementations that support explicit
time like that. If they do (Fran or Yampa), then I've never seen that
feature used before. FrTime and other impure FRP systems will support
similar behavior using a clock signal...but this is just wrapping a
timer in a signal abstraction and I wouldn't considered it as explicit
time.

My feeling is that Haskell FRP would work for numeric integration, but
most physical simulations and all games don't fit into that category.
Rather, you have to approximate and integrate at each step with respect
to various forces that apply at that step. Things like collision make
that much more messier.

By [Sean McDirmid](user/1852 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09
05:30 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [Reactive allows it easily](node/4099#comment-62144)

Reactive allows it easily enough. You can even turn a list of
[(20,'a'),(40,'b'),...] into an event or behavior.

[edit] Yampa also supports explicit time, hidden inside SF. In the
original Frob/AFRP papers (predecessor to Yampa), SF a b was pretty much
an arrow-compatible shorthand for (t-\>a)-\>(t-\>b). Modern Yampa adds a
lot of specializations to this.

I can't recall the details of Fran, but I suspect it also allowed access
to time - if not directly, then at least indirectly as an integral on a
constant.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 08:48
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [It took me 5 years to](node/4099#comment-62147)

It took me 5 years to understand the point of FRP (from when I first
read the Fran paper), so I definitely admit I could be missing
something. What would a simple integrator such as Euler or Verlet would
look like in Reactive? How would the physical constraints (say springs,
gravity, pivots) be composed?

By [Sean McDirmid](user/1852 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09
09:51 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [Physical Constraints](node/4099#comment-62305)

I expect you have more experience than do I with regards to physical
constraints, given your development of Bling.

But you could presumably describe forces on a body over time, compose
these (additively), divide by mass, then integrate twice to get position
as a function of time. Use fixpoints to add friction as a function of
velocity and position. For pivots... do something similar with torques.

Reactive provides you a piecewise Euler integrator in its common library
(FRP.Reactive.Behavior.integral). You are, of course, free to provide
your own; the integrator doesn't use any details inaccessible to you.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Fri, 2010-10-15 08:29
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [The real challenge is in](node/4099#comment-62306)

The real challenge is in describing or composing your forces to work
with your integrator, and how you represent collision reactions. Verlet
you just do displacement, but most mainstream physics engines these days
are based on impulse accumulation, where each step you simply build and
dispatch lists of applied forces.

I'm still not sure if the integral in Reactive means the same thing that
it does in a physics engine.

By [Sean McDirmid](user/1852 "View user profile.") at Fri, 2010-10-15
09:11 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [Integral in Reactive means](node/4099#comment-62308)

Integral in Reactive means the same thing that it does in Calculus.

If there's a difference, it is because Reactive uses *continuous* time.
There are no discrete 'steps'. You aren't building and dispatching a
list of forces; rather, you'd use a fixpoint or Arrow loop and
*continuously* applying forces - at least logically; the actual
computation is nice and lazy, computed for the moment of observation.
(Continuous FRP only works because of laziness.)

Collisions would probably be represented as events. An 'event' in
Reactive is actually a (potentially infinite) list of discrete instants
of interest (which may recursively be events) - such as an infinite list
of collisions along with impulse, vector, elasticity. Most of the
Reactive library is about the interplay between behaviors and events.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Fri, 2010-10-15 09:45
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [Ah, I was getting confused](node/4099#comment-62316)

Ah, I was getting confused with Euler's method, which is a discrete. All
integrators in physics engines are discrete approximations. An impulse
is a discrete approximation of a collision reaction, which really isn't
instantaneous (a high amount of force is applied for a short amount of
time). I like the idea that at least on the surface, the user applies
forces continuously (or at least declaratively), but on the inside,
their should be some efficient discrete approximations going on.

This is very much above my head. I'm neither the physics geek or the
Haskell geek to work out anything effective here. But I would definitely
love to see what someone else could come up with.

By [Sean McDirmid](user/1852 "View user profile.") at Fri, 2010-10-15
23:37 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [on the inside, their should](node/4099#comment-62318)

> on the inside, their should be some efficient discrete approximations
> going on

I don't know. I'd certainly appreciate if the language supported true
integrals based upon abstract analysis of the functions involved, and
only resorted to discrete approximations when it doesn't know how to
produce the integral function. For performance *and* precision *and*
accuracy, producing the integral function then computing it is likely
superior to discrete approximations for the vast majority of functions.
Please, sprinkle a little Mathematica into my Haskell...

For now, however, Haskell uses discrete approximations just like
everything else. (This doesn't change the *meaning* of integral. ;-)
Reactive does provide a common-case optimization: a behavior may vary
between discrete, constant values (e.g. holding the value 3 between
times 1.0 and 10.0) and continuous time-varying functions. While this
optimization is provided primarily for reactive efficiency (only
recompute what might have changed), it also optimizes the integral.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-16 00:12
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [Computing the integral](node/4099#comment-62319)

Computing the integral symbolically is not necessarily cheaper in
animations. For example suppose you have a quantity
`x(t) = integrate(f(...))` that is the position coordinate of a ball on
the screen. Now you want to know `x(t=0), x(t=0.1), x(t=0.2), ...`. At
time t=0.2 you don't have to numerically approximate x from scratch,
because you already computed x(t=0.1). The numerical algorithm uses this
value to compute the approximation at t=0.2. This could well be cheaper
than evaluating the symbolic integral (the formula for it is presumably
computed at compile time, or otherwise computed beforehand). Not to
mention that most functions don't have a symbolic integral, especially
if the integrand involves user input (which happens in most programs).

By [Jules Jacobs](user/2891 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-16
01:29 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [Relative Efforts for Relative Benefits](node/4099#comment-62320)

You make valid points.

I'm assuming that the symbolic integral is computed at runtime (lazily),
and would only be used for many common-case expressions that are
relatively easy to integrate (especially, polynomials and trigonometry).
Further, I'm assuming that one might do so 'partially', i.e. to the
extent that an expression is a sum of other expressions one has a lot of
flexibility to only perform symbolic integrals on some elements. This
is, effectively, just an extension to what Reactive already does with
its 'constant' behaviors.

I've considered a few approaches for this in Haskell, i.e. via use of
GADTs or the DeepApplicative used by Conal for tangible values. Mind
you, I've never got past ruminating on the subject, and couldn't speak
much about performance beyond the theoretical. But it might also be
worth the effort for purposes of edge-detection and min-max analysis.

That said, FRP is already incremental in the temporal dimension. I'd
like to see better support for making it also incremental in the spatial
dimension - e.g. when working with large, time-varying maps or data
sets.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-16 02:14
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [Thank you but....](node/4099#comment-62141)

Thank you both for your detailed responses.

FRP is quite elegant but, as far as I understand it, I don't think it
does a grand unification of the kind SICP authors talked about. As per
Conal Eliott's response on Stack overflow, FRP's concurrency is
*fine-grained, determinate, and continuous*. May be I am on a different
frequency but right there I have a problem. In real life events occur in
an indeterminate or random order. For example, an OS for a real machine
has to deal with many events which may occur in any order or
simultaneously (while core-1 is processing an input packet, core-2 may
have to service a disk interrupt, and so on). This is straightforward to
model with Dijkstra's guarded commands (and in CSP based languages)and
while not easy, one can still reason about it. How would I do this in
FRP?

And by "model" I do not mean just simulation. In order to interact with
reality one has to have a model of it (you may not know when the next
packet will arrive but you know the protocol it will follow etc). And
often we connect these simulators to real world (Qemu for example).

To expose my bias, I don't see how you can do without a proper treatment
of state in any grand unification.

By [Bakul Shah](user/8829 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 07:38
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [To expose my bias, I don't](node/4099#comment-62142)

> To expose my bias, I don't see how you can do without a proper
> treatment of state in any grand unification.

I don't think anyone here is claiming that you can. FRP is a step to
declaratively dealing with and manipulating time-varying values, which
could be backed by state. The trick to dealing with state is to squirrel
it off somewhere, encapsulate it, and provide an elegant abstraction for
manipulating it and reasoning about it.

By [Sean McDirmid](user/1852 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09
08:34 | [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post
comments

### [You've pointed it out](node/4099#comment-62143)

You've pointed it out yourself. In the will to tackle with "*real life
events occur[ing] in an indeterminate or random order*" we have to
introduce notions such as non-determinism, undecidability, oracles, etc.

The problem is the thing one wants to model and implement at the end of
the day is (presumably) software systems with computational capabilities
in finite time, be they deterministic or not.

But one has also to pay attention to which "universe" belongs/what is
the true nature of the (non-)determinism, etc, spoken of, in the
ontology eventually made up for consideration purposes, pre-modeling.

Are those clearly defined as being *within* the bounds of the
software/computational models discussed, or, are those of the kind that
actually (mischievously) escapes them, really belonging instead to some
so-called "real-world"/non-formally modelled (anywhere, and/or not
enough) human factors?

I suspect the confusion can be done quite easily by us,
"software/language folks", when we borrow vocabularies from other
domains and ontologies. We have many examples that sometimes, while
we're careful enough to define the words to denote the concepts we're
interested in, we may also forget the true nature of their genuinely
originating context (hence the need for long, thorough researches over
decades) and I suspect some just haven't been studied long enough yet --
we've [barely
started](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/proof-theory-development/#LatDevNatDed)
to understand the relations between computation and formalisms -- tell
me about understanding how Mr./Mrs/Ms. Smith decides what to do next,
with or without some form of "computer" within direct reach...

My assumption is that, anyway, as appealing and full of potential as FRP
can be, indeed, it'll have just like any other paradigm to acknowledge
one of the fundamental, say, "implementation limitation factors" of
scientific investigation on some of its "borderline" objects, such as
the [observer
effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_effect_(physics)) (from
which ramifications to different interpretations of our world are,
still, subject to recurrent debates in physics; e.g., [Copenhagen
interpretation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copenhagen_interpretation),
and the like).

[Edit: note I didn't mean to say above that, e.g., non-determinism is
out of reach from FRP; the point I was trying to make is just that FRP,
like any others, has a scope and its clear recognition and definition of
it, as well as the ease of resolution of issues for its chosen purposes
and objectives by implementations, will be, as usual, among the
determining factors for its acceptance/success.]

By [YSharp](user/7870 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 08:42 |
[login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [This being said... I must](node/4099#comment-62146)

This being said... I must confess I find FRP *really* "cool", and the
only new (right?) programming paradigm that makes sense to me to feel as
being probably the "next big thing". My only regret is I haven't found
enough time yet to understand better how its beam of ideas/principles
actually work *through* implementations, and even less, about the full
extent of the potential we can hope for it, in the long run.

I suspect, though, the core principles are of that kind of
"pure"/optimum set able to embrace the union of several other paradigms
at the same time (and maybe others yet to be discovered) very elegantly,
and for the long term.

Definitely the kind of thing I'm willing to watch in the domain of PLs
(not my primary interest today; being more into modeling tools... before
runtime... and until FRP takes over the world and we don't even need
dehydrated-intermediary-modeling anymore ;)

By [YSharp](user/7870 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 09:50 |
[login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [In real life events occur in](node/4099#comment-62145)

> In real life events occur in an indeterminate or random order.

That can be handled in FRP. UIs have been written in FRP, for example.
One updates the behavior model for the keyboard event-stream based upon
the arrival of new keyboard events. (Reactive cheats a little with
unsafeIO to implement 'future' values.)

> In order to interact with reality one has to have a model of it (you
> may not know when the next packet will arrive but you know the
> protocol it will follow etc).

That isn't necessary, neither having a model of reality nor knowing the
protocol upon which a packet arrives. And, more relevantly, any model of
the outside world does not need to be part of your program.

> To expose my bias, I don't see how you can do without a proper
> treatment of state in any grand unification.

There are many ways to have 'state' be implicit. SICP provided an
example for stream processing - state being embedded in a fold over an
input stream. FRP supports implicit state in its behavior definitions,
and does a better job with because one can merge event-streams based
upon 'when' each event takes place.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 08:58
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [Functional programming and non-determinism](node/4099#comment-62149)

> As per Conal Eliott's response on Stack overflow, FRP's concurrency is
> fine-grained, determinate, and continuous. May be I am on a different
> frequency but right there I have a problem. In real life events occur
> in an indeterminate or random order. For example, an OS for a real
> machine has to deal with many events which may occur in any order or
> simultaneously (while core-1 is processing an input packet, core-2 may
> have to service a disk interrupt, and so on).

I think that the work of Peter Van Roy is very on-topic here. In his
must-read book [CTM](http://www.info.ucl.ac.be/~pvr/book.html), he
describe the programming language Oz as a stack/tree of layers, each
embedding a particular paradigm. He goes into great length to show how
one may progressively slide from pure, deterministic functional
programming to pure concurrent programming *with no observable
nondeterminism*, and then in a final step add observable nondeterminism.

A wise advice given in this book is that the observable nondeterminism
can usually be factored out of the main system. In your example for
example, one may consider that there are two pure sequential event
streams (one for each core), that get mixed in an observably
nondeterministic way into a single event stream that is the input of the
OS (say a stream of interleaved system calls). Only the interleaving of
the two streams are nondeterministic : the main OS loop can still be
described without observable nondeterminism. You have a system where the
nondeterminism is carefully confined.

In terms of programming languages, this means that it is interesting to
support programming constructs with no observable nondeterminism, while
still allowing to gracefully degenerate into non-deterministic behaviour
is specific, encapsulated parts of the program.

I don't know if the CTM is accessible online, and it's certainly a long
book to read. The shorter paper [Programming Paradigms for Dummies: What
Every Programmer Should Know](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/3465)
is discussed on LtU, and could be considered a partial, condensed
summary of the book. Section 6.1 (Avoiding nondeterminism in a
concurrent language) is particulary on-topic, with a (short)
discussion/overview/comparison of Declarative Concurrency, Constraint
Programmating, Functional Reactive Programming, Discrete Synchronous
Programming and Message-Passing Concurrency.

By [gasche](user/7012 "View user profile.") at Sat, 2010-10-09 10:25 |
[login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [Thank you](node/4099#comment-62300)

for the references to CTM and the shorter paper. Much to digest and
think about before I can properly respond. But one comment. I am not
sure that we can avoid problems like deadlock or race conditions in the
way suggested by Peter Van Roy. In response to my example you commented
that "the main OS loop can be described without observable
nondeterminism" but extending this further, two or three such OSes can
interact in a such way that they can deadlock (or livelock, where no
progress gets made). So while factoring out "observable nondeterminism",
or "squirreling off state somewhere" (as Sean McDirmid put it) is
worthwhile, IMHO, as long as the language doesn't handle state, it can't
detect such problems.

I find it interesting that in [this
comment](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4094#comment-62281) on the
Smalltalk design principles thread, Shap complains about languages not
handling temporal requirements; which to me is part of the same puzzle.

By [Bakul Shah](user/8829 "View user profile.") at Fri, 2010-10-15 05:03
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [It sounds like your problem](node/4099#comment-62301)

It sounds like your problem is with how OSs are designed, not PLs. OSs
are introducing additional semantics and throwing out any reactivity
guarantees being provided by the reactive code in your domain. Most
applications are not sensitive to this, but if they are, it seems like
you can view the OS as additional application code (e.g., supporting
library) that does not respect reasonable language guarantees, at which
point it doesn't seem far off from a buggy C component that randomly
modifies memory.

By [lmeyerov](user/2585 "View user profile.") at Fri, 2010-10-15 05:57 |
[login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

### [your problem is with how OSs](node/4099#comment-62302)

> your problem is with how OSs are designed, not PLs. OSs are
> introducing additional semantics and throwing out any reactivity
> guarantees

Well, the other side of that coin is: if your PL isn't adequate for
capturing semantics in an OS, perhaps it is the PL that should be judged
at fault.

A [comment](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4094#comment-62097) from
Thomas Lord asks: does your language offer a good "explanation" for
asynchronous I/O? (Are the abstractions good?)

That seems a critical point. The physical properties of your hardware
need to have an adequate explanation in your language - something that
will fit without too much complexity or overheads; otherwise, you'll end
up hacking your language to make things fit, and you'll lose many nice
properties of your PL.

A PL that is based around processing asynchronous signals and streams
(such as FRP) might well have advantages over most, since most CPU
interaction with hardware is asynchronous these days. FRP wouldn't have
a problem interacting with DMA (or at least the vast majority of its
applications). But I imagine there would be issues with MMIO - in
particular, when old state is overwritten without approval from a CPU.
FRP - at least as espoused by Conal Elliott and Paul Hudak - lacks an
adequate 'explanation' for that sort of data loss. If we wanted to fit
MMIO into the semantics, we might need to explicitly maintain a series
of 'snapshots' of input memory - which would be overhead and undesirable
complexity.

By [dmbarbour](user/6002 "View user profile.") at Fri, 2010-10-15 07:12
| [login](user/login) or [register](user/register) to post comments

* * * * *

Logs: [Hack The Planet](http://wmf.editthispage.com/) ;
[JavaLobby](http://www.javalobby.org) ; [Daily
Python-URL](http://www.pythonware.com/daily) ; [Daily
WTF](http://thedailywtf.com/default.aspx) ; [PHP
everywhere](http://phplens.com/phpeverywhere/) ;
[(more)](/node/view/13)\
 Wikis: [WikiWiki](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?RecentChanges) ;
[Erlang](http://www.trapexit.org/Special:Recentchanges) ; [Common
Lisp](http://www.cliki.net/Recent%20Changes) ;
[Haskell](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Special:Recentchanges) ;
[Squeak](%0Ahttp://wiki.squeak.org/squeak/recent) ;
[Tcl](http://purl.org/thecliff/tcl/wiki) ; [Program
Transformation](http://www.program-transformation.org/Transform/WebChanges)
![image](http://sac.appsolutions.com/hitme?id=ltu&a=hit)

Browse archives
---------------

[«](archive/2014/08/15 "Previous month") September 2014

Su

Mo

Tu

We

Th

Fr

Sa

[1](archive/2014/9/1 "1 post")

2

3

4

[5](archive/2014/9/5 "1 post")

[6](archive/2014/9/6 "2 posts")

[7](archive/2014/9/7 "2 posts")

8

[9](archive/2014/9/9 "3 posts")

[10](archive/2014/9/10 "2 posts")

[11](archive/2014/9/11 "1 post")

[12](archive/2014/9/12 "2 posts")

13

[14](archive/2014/9/14 "1 post")

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Active forum topics
-------------------

-   [Who Needs Garbage Collection?](node/5007 "75 comments")
-   [Optimisation by repeated beta- and
    eta-reduction](node/5045 "9 comments")
-   [Re-thinking Prolog](node/5043 "20 comments")
-   [Function arity with currying and
    call-by-push-value](node/5038 "16 comments")
-   [Request For Advice and Guidance On Writing a Scheme To C
    Compiler?](node/5042 "12 comments")

[more](forum "Read the latest forum topics.")

New forum topics
----------------

-   [Optimisation by repeated beta- and
    eta-reduction](node/5045 "9 comments")
-   [Re-thinking Prolog](node/5043 "20 comments")
-   [Request For Advice and Guidance On Writing a Scheme To C
    Compiler?](node/5042 "12 comments")
-   [LtU database problem](node/5041 "3 comments")
-   [Higher abstraction through NLP and automatic code
    derivation?](node/5040 "13 comments")

[more](forum "Read the latest forum topics.")

Recent comments
---------------

-   [Which spec?](node/5007#comment-82377)\
    24 min 13 sec ago
-   [People can study whatever they like](node/5045#comment-82376)\
    43 min 37 sec ago
-   [Not started yet](node/5007#comment-82375)\
    13 hours 35 min ago
-   [Did you ever implement this?](node/5007#comment-82374)\
    13 hours 52 min ago
-   [The guy who wrote that is](node/5034#comment-82373)\
    15 hours 15 min ago
-   [Haskell has that whole](node/5034#comment-82372)\
    15 hours 52 min ago
-   [Thanks!](node/5043#comment-82371)\
    16 hours 43 min ago
-   [More precisely, the paper](node/5038#comment-82370)\
    16 hours 49 min ago
-   [Prolog already handles what they want](node/5043#comment-82369)\
    16 hours 58 min ago
-   [I noticed that!](node/5043#comment-82368)\
    17 hours 58 min ago


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4099
