-   [Video Guides](https://www.youtube.com/githubguides)
-   [Support](https://github.com/support)
-   [GitHub.com](https://github.com)
-   [](/feed/index.xml)

[![GitHub Guides logo](/images/logo@2x.png)](/)

Understanding the GitHub Flow
=============================

5 minute read

GitHub Flow is a lightweight, branch-based workflow that supports teams
and projects where deployments are made regularly. This guide explains
how and why GitHub Flow works.

### Create a branch

When you're working on a project, you're going to have a bunch of
different features or ideas in progress at any given time â€“ some of
which are ready to go, and others which are not. Branching exists to
help you manage this workflow.

When you create a branch in your project, you're creating an environment
where you can try out new ideas. Changes you make on a branch don't
affect the `master` branch, so you're free to experiment and commit
changes, safe in the knowledge that your branch won't be merged until
it's ready to be reviewed by someone you're collaborating with.

#### ProTip

Branching is a core concept in Git, and the entire GitHub Flow is based
upon it. There's only one rule: anything in the `master` branch is
always deployable.

Because of this, it's extremely important that your new branch is
created off of master when working on a feature or a fix. Your branch
name should be descriptive (e.g., `refactor-authentication`,
`user-content-cache-key`, `make-retina-avatars`), so that others can see
what is being worked on.

### Add commits

Once your branch has been created, it's time to start making changes.
Whenever you add, edit, or delete a file, you're making a commit, and
adding them to your branch. This process of adding commits keeps track
of your progress as you work on a feature branch.

Commits also create a transparent history of your work that others can
follow to understand what you've done and why. Each commit has an
associated commit message, which is a description explaining why a
particular change was made. Furthermore, each commit is considered a
separate unit of change. This lets you roll back changes if a bug is
found, or if you decide to head in a different direction.

#### ProTip

Commit messages are important, especially since Git tracks your changes
and then displays them as commits once they're pushed to the server. By
writing clear commit messages, you can make it easier for other people
to follow along and provide feedback.

### Open a Pull Request

Pull Requests initiate discussion about your commits. Because they're
tightly integrated with the underlying Git repository, anyone can see
exactly what changes would be merged if they accept your request.

You can open a Pull Request at any point during the development process:
when you have little or no code but want to share some screenshots or
general ideas, when you're stuck and need help or advice, or when you're
ready for someone to review your work. By using GitHub's @mention system
in your Pull Request message, you can ask for feedback from specific
people or teams, whether they're down the hall or ten time zones away.

#### ProTip

Pull Requests are useful for contributing to open source projects and
for managing changes to shared repositories. If you're using a Fork &
Pull Model, Pull Requests provide a way to notify project maintainers
about the changes you'd like them to consider. If you're using a Shared
Repository Model, Pull Requests help start code review and conversation
about proposed changes before they're merged into the master branch.

### Discuss and review your code

Once a Pull Request has been opened, the person or team reviewing your
changes may have questions or comments. Perhaps the coding style doesn't
match project guidelines, the change is missing unit tests, or maybe
everything looks great and props are in order. Pull Requests are
designed to encourage and capture this type of conversation.

You can also continue to push to your branch in light of discussion and
feedback about your commits. If someone comments that you forgot to do
something or if there is a bug in the code, you can fix it in your
branch and push up the change. GitHub will show your new commits and any
additional feedback you may receive in the unified Pull Request view.

#### ProTip

Pull Request comments are written in Markdown, so you can embed images
and emoji, use pre-formatted text blocks, and other lightweight
formatting.

### Merge and deploy

Once your Pull Request has been reviewed and the branch passes your
tests, it's time to merge your code to the master branch for deployment.
If you want to test things before merging in the repository on GitHub,
you can perform the merge locally first. This is also handy if you don't
have push access to the repository.

Once merged, Pull Requests preserve a record of the historical changes
to your code. Because they're searchable, they let anyone go back in
time to understand why and how a decision was made.

#### ProTip

By incorporating certain keywords into the text of your Pull Request,
you can associate issues with code. When your Pull Request is merged,
the related issues are also closed. For example, entering the phrase
`Closes #32` would close issue number 32 in the repository. For more
information, check out our [help
article](https://help.github.com/articles/closing-issues-via-commit-messages).

[](# "Previous") [](# "Next")

Last updated Dec 12, 2013

[GitHub](https://github.com) is the best way to build and ship
software.\
 Powerful collaboration, code review, and code management for open
source and private projects.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://guides.github.com/introduction/flow/index.html
