![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/social/facebook_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/social/twitter_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/about_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/home_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/mag_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/subscribe_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/blogs_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/about_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/home_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/mag_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/subscribe_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/navigation/blogs_sel.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/arrow_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/right_arrow_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/left_arrow_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/play.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/auth/submit_mo.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/auth/logout_mo.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/buy_print_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/buy_digital_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/buy_print_sub_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/buy_digital_sub_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/misc/edit_hov.png)
![image](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/themes/boukman/images/side/bookmarx_hov.png)

*Jacobin* needs your help!
--------------------------

What's coming in 2014?

A book series with Verso

A nationwide series of reading groups

New audio and video content \
 [...and much
more](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2013/12/our-plans-for-2014-support-jacobin-today/)

[](/)

Jacobin
=======

Reason in Revolt

[](https://www.jacobinmag.com/subscribe/)

-   [About Us](https://www.jacobinmag.com/about/)
-   [Online](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/blogs)
-   [In The Magazine](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/a-world-to-win/)
-   [Donate](https://www.jacobinmag.com/donate/)
-   [Subscribe](https://www.jacobinmag.com/subscribe/)

[Higher Education’s Aristocrats](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/higher-educations-aristocrats/)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

by [David Francis
Mihalyfy](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/david-francis-mihalyfy/ "Posts by David Francis Mihalyfy")

### While tuition increases continue to burden students, a small group of administrators are getting rich.

![Justin Kern /
Flickr](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/3409391024_3e66909090_b.jpg)

Justin Kern / Flickr

Last week, the Barack Obama Foundation announced that the University of
Chicago is one of four finalists to house the Obama Presidential
Library, according to its
[mission](http://www.obamapresidentialfoundation.org/about) of finding a
site that reflects “President Obama’s values and priorities throughout
his career in public service.”

If Obama chooses UChicago, however, he risks tying his legacy to the
American university that perhaps [most
exemplifies](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/06/higher-eds-for-profit-future/)
higher education’s current crisis of mission. Rather than being
institutions that prioritize free inquiry, research, and high-quality
education, universities are increasingly acting like the worst of Wall
Street, where anything goes in order make a buck for the people at the
top.

The latest sign of identity crisis at UChicago? Hefty pay raises to a
large number of top staff, who have enriched themselves at great cost to
their institution.

New analysis of tax data from publicly available IRS 990 forms
[shows](https://pdf.yt/d/_LIPrV1sdxyicjbW) that eight high-level
UChicago administrators have received more than $7.6 million in
compensation increases since 2007-2008, even as the school moved toward
and suffered a credit downgrade.

Over five years, administrators enjoyed pay increases of between 40
percent and 135 percent, and as a result each received $450,000 to $3.3
million from cumulative increases by the end of 2012-2013, the most
recent year for which tax data is available.

UChicago thus ended up paying $2.5 million more annually for the
combined services of these eight people — an increase from $3.4 to
almost $6 million per year.

These administrators include President Robert Zimmer, former Provost
Thomas Rosenbaum (now president of the California Institute of
Technology), and executive vice president David Fithian, a former
Harvard dean. Previously, all three received scrutiny because they did
not help identify administrators responsible for an apparently deceptive
UChicago statement about increases to Zimmer, the country’s [highest
paid](http://chronicle.com/article/Executive-Compensation-at/143541/#id=table)
private university president.

Five more vice presidents round out the list, their other prominent
affiliations hinting at a wider national problem of values in academia.
Of these, David Greene has since become president of Colby College,
while Nimalan Chinniah will soon begin work as executive vice president
of Northwestern University. Greene previously worked at Brown University
and Smith and Chinniah at Vanderbilt University, while vice president
for communications Julie Peterson worked at the University of Michigan
and the University of Indiana.

The eight administrators represent all administrators who have served
full academic years since 2007-2008 and for whom comprehensive annual
tax data is publicly available, but other, recently hired administrators
have also received outsize pay hikes.

For example, James Nondorf, a former administrator at Yale and
Rensselaer Polytechnic who has a master’s degree in ethics, began
working as vice president of enrollment and student advancement in
2009-2010. He has since enjoyed a 112 percent pay jump — from roughly
$220,000 to $470,000 a year — for a total of $636,000 skimmed over just
three years.

[![image-1](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/image-11-1024x372.jpg)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/image-11.jpg)

The reasoning behind the compensation increases and the identity of the
people overseeing them are still unclear. Although Chinniah could not be
contacted through UChicago or Northwestern, all other administrators did
not respond to multiple requests for the names and offices of people
overseeing their compensation increases, a rationale for the increases,
corroborating documentation for the increases’ rationale (or their
permission to obtain such documentation), or a personal statement
clarifying how UChicago benefits from this allocation of money.

Fithian, vice president Donald Levy, and an assistant responding to
Zimmer’s email directed the request to spokesman Steve Kloehn, who after
a second query said he would be “back in touch,” but did not respond to
multiple emails asking for a specific timeline.

An unpublished October 2013 UChicago statement, circulated via email,
said in reference to Zimmer that the compensation committee of board of
trustees considers consultant data and “the recommendation of the
president” in order to make annual recommendations on compensation “for
all officers and deans of the University,” and the board’s executive
committee then “makes final decisions.” Uncertain, however, are the
identity of any of these committee members, the role of the larger board
of trustees in creating these committees, or which specific
administrators fall under this process.

Three of the eight administrators saw minor job title changes during the
five-year period, but examination of yearly increases suggests the
raises were granted independently of such changes. Additionally, the pay
increases are likely not attributable to increased job responsibilities.

According to several administrators from other universities speaking on
background, claims of additional duties are difficult to verify since
the appearance of such duties can be created in order to justify title
upgrades and increased compensation. Furthermore, a general rise in
compensation without a corresponding decrease in administrators or in
remuneration for other positions likely indicates increases were
allocated for other reasons.

The sharp uptick in administrative pay has come at an especially
inopportune time, overlapping with a major economic downturn and an
accumulation of debt totaling more than half of UChicago’s endowment and
constituting the largest relative
[debt](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-03-17/university-of-chicago-is-outlier-with-growing-debt-load.html)
among peer institutions. Subsequently, after previous shifts of its
credit rating outlook to negative by both Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s,
UChicago suffered a July 2014
[downgrade](https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-downgrades-University-of-Chicago-IL-to-Aa2-and-assigns--PR_304415)
of its credit rating by Moody’s due to an “increasingly high level of
outstanding debt” and “expectations of thin cash flow.”

It also now plans to issue $750 million in bonds, more than half of
which will go to refinancing outstanding debt, although a post-downgrade
[statement](http://news.uchicago.edu/article/2014/07/18/statement-university-chicagos-credit-rating)
by chairman of the board of trustees and twenty-one-year Goldman Sachs
veteran Andrew Alper only mentions debt acquisition for “bold
investments in the academic priorities articulated by our faculty,
deans, provost, and president.”

According to a financial plan obtained by [*Crain’s Chicago
Business*](http://www.chicagobusiness.com/article/20130817/ISSUE01/308179974/u-of-c-tries-to-keep-up-with-the-ivy-league),
UChicago faces operating deficits of $5 to $30 million a year through
2018, and “ratings agencies could downgrade the university’s credit by
as many as two notches.”

In comparison, the pay increases detailed above would constitute 8 to 50
percent of the projected deficits, and the eight administrators’ overall
pay would constitute 20 percent to 120 percent of the deficits. (It is
unclear if administrative pay has been or will be subject to the
“targeted expense reductions” that Alper mentioned in his post-downgrade
statement.)

In the case of Zimmer, the UChicago news office had previously
[affirmed](http://news.uchicago.edu/article/2013/12/15/university-statement-presidential-compensation)
that his compensation increases were “consistent with leaders of
institutions of similar scale and caliber,” a conclusion reached
according to “data and guidance from an outside consultant who compares
similar roles at 20 peer institutions.” They refused to identify the
peer institutions.

Subsequently, an independent
[analysis](http://news.uchicago.edu/article/2013/12/15/university-statement-presidential-compensation)
of tax data suggested the peculiarity of Zimmer’s compensation increases
compared to the other top twenty American private universities by
endowment: Zimmer enjoyed $115,000 to $320,000 annual increases three to
seven-and-a-half times higher than the median, and his recent 110
percent, $1.76 million pay spike, primarily attributable to deferred
compensation, constituted “an extreme outlier… around double all other
outliers.”

Alper further claimed that “Bob Zimmer’s compensation reflects the high
degree of confidence the board has in his leadership,” but the public
record indicates uneven job performance by administrators like Zimmer
and reluctance by the board of trustees to evaluate job performance.

Also notable: unpublished emails, a union grievance, and subsequent
administrative response suggest that Zimmer or someone close to him
instituted an administration building elevator policy whereby uniformed
employees were told to use the stairs when Zimmer was in the building,
including a man who had received two hip replacement surgeries. The
ultimate source of these alleged violations of the Americans with
Disabilities and Civil Rights Acts was not identified despite multiple
inquiries, including to Alper, who responded via email that “this is
clearly not a board matter.”

In addition, during the period of the pay increases, at least two
trustee-associated companies profited from administrative actions, even
though such arrangements go against standard advice in the sector:
UChicago staff awarded campus dining services to trustee-associated
company Aramark, and they supported the use of city money to build a
hotel in the trustee-associated Hyatt chain. UChicago administrators
also attempted to give an aborted predecessor hotel project to White
Lodgings, a company associated with a third trustee from the legally and
financially interlinked medical center.

UChicago’s current situation seems to constitute a worst-case example of
the “failure of governing boards to ensure that institutions adhere to
their stated purpose,” as an August 2014 American Council of Trustees
and Alumni
[report](http://www.goacta.org/images/download/governance_for_a_new_era.pdf)
put it. The ACTA correctly lays partial blame for a decline in
educational quality and an increase in costs on trustees, but ultimately
identifies the problem as a “strategy of passive governance” and
recommends greater voluntary engagement and scrupulosity within a system
where trustees “are beholden to none.”

Yet UChicago’s outsize pay increases, trustee-associated contracts, and
overall lack of transparency and accountability do not seem to be the
result of passive governance.

Instead, all currently available information indicates that an unknown
number of UChicago’s trustees and top echelon administrators are
purposefully exploiting an absence of formal checks-and-balances in
order to enrich themselves at the expense of the university and
taxpayers’ investment in education and research.

Furthermore, because a majority of UChicago’s trustees appoint future
trustees, change is only likely to come through public outrage, then
informal, inefficient mechanisms like faculty votes, online petitions,
and withdrawal of alumni donations.

At a time of [widespread administrative
bloat](http://chronicle.com/article/Administrator-Hiring-Drove-28-/144519/)
and [crushing student debt](http://www.cnbc.com/id/40682477), the case
of UChicago underscores the extent to which personal profit is
outweighing public good at American universities — but the Barack Obama
Foundation did not respond to a request for comment on how discovery of
the compensation increases might affect UChicago’s candidacy.

To say the university has merely become too top-heavy risks making the
trend seem relatively benign. At UChicago and elsewhere, the
administrative class is gobbling up money with abandon, imperiling the
public interest, and foreclosing on students’ futures.

If you like this article, please
[subscribe](http://store.jacobinmag.com/category/subscriptions) or
[donate](https://www.jacobinmag.com/donate/).

9.27.14

David Mihalyfy is an instructor at the School of the Art Institute of
Chicago and a PhD candidate in the history of Christianity at the
University of Chicago Divinity School.

Featured
--------

-   ### [Liberalism and Gentrification](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/liberalism-and-gentrification/)

    [Gavin
    Mueller](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/gavin-mueller/ "Posts by Gavin Mueller")

    [![141176581040712](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/141176581040712-160x160.jpeg)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/liberalism-and-gentrification/)

-   ### [We Need a Global Carbon Tax](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/we-need-a-global-carbon-tax/)

    [Suresh
    Naidu](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/suresh-naidu/ "Posts by Suresh Naidu")

    [![xlakcogod8ulg9czbdol](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/xlakcogod8ulg9czbdol1-160x160.jpg)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/we-need-a-global-carbon-tax/)

-   ### [Against Sharing](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/against-sharing/)

    [Avi
    Asher-Schapiro](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/avi-asher-schapiro/ "Posts by Avi Asher-Schapiro")

    [![4508568871\_2ebb29be97\_o](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/4508568871_2ebb29be97_o1-160x160.jpg)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/against-sharing/)

-   ### [The Promise of Socialist Feminism](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/the-promise-of-socialist-feminism/)

    [Johanna
    Brenner](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/johanna-brenner/ "Posts by Johanna Brenner")

    [![tineye / Wikimedia
    Commons](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Triece-Pic-160x160.jpg)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/the-promise-of-socialist-feminism/)

-   ### [The Poverty of Culture](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/the-poverty-of-culture/)

    [Jonah Birch & Paul
    Heideman](https://www.jacobinmag.com/author/jonah-birch-and-paul-heideman/ "Posts by Jonah Birch & Paul Heideman")

    [![141090300186105](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/141090300186105-160x160.jpg)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/the-poverty-of-culture/)

[](http://www.facebook.com/jacobinmag) [](http://twitter.com/jacobinmag)

Follow us

[](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/bookmarx)

BOOKMARX
--------

Because the internet needs a vanguard.

Smells like
[counterrevolution](http://www.cnn.com/2014/09/27/world/americas/cuba-revolutionaries-fragrances/).

[Worker
bees](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/09/science/no-glass-ceiling-for-worker-bees.html)
must rise with their class.

To Finland [Station](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KSq1Z9tQW0Y)

[The Jacobinism of
Ants](http://www.geekosystem.com/enslaved-ants-rebel/)

[Unite
Queer](http://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/unite-queer)

Don’t [study](https://twitter.com/jacobinmag/status/498142623140700160)
collective action alone.

[8-Bit Karl](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vz3eOb6Yl1s)

[Unlike
Mike](http://www.thenation.com/blog/180626/preordained-why-lebron-james-was-always-coming-back-cleveland#)

Always Forward!
---------------

Sign up for our email newsletter.

[Current Issue](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/a-world-to-win)
----------------------------------------------------------------

### [A World to Win](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/a-world-to-win)

[![jacobin\_issue\_14\_cover\_animation\_thumbnail](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/jacobin_issue_14_cover_animation_thumbnail.gif)](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/a-world-to-win)

[](http://store.jacobinmag.com/product/)

Buy print

[](http://store.jacobinmag.com/product/-digital)

Buy digital

[![New Left Review
ad](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Jacobin88w.png)](http://newleftreview.org/?utm_source=jacobin&utm_medium=website&utm_content=half-page&utm_campaign=NLR88)
[![NP Left
Behind](https://www.jacobinmag.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/logo-red.png)](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/subalterngames/no-pineapple-left-behind)

[Donate](/donate/)
------------------

1.

We won't send you a tote bag.

2.

We will send you a holiday card.

3.

And possibly some baked goods.

4.

We're an independent leftist magazine.

5.

With pretty pictures.

[](https://www.jacobinmag.com/about)

### About Us

*Jacobin* is a leading voice of the American left, offering socialist
perspectives on politics, economics, and culture. The print magazine is
released quarterly and reaches over 6,000 subscribers, in addition to a
web audience of 400,000 a month.

### The Magazine

[Home](https://www.jacobinmag.com/)

[About](https://www.jacobinmag.com/about)

[Current Issue](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/a-world-to-win)

[All Issues](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/)

[Bookmarx](https://www.jacobinmag.com/category/bookmarx)

### Support Us

[Contact](https://www.jacobinmag.com/contact)

[Subscribe](https://www.jacobinmag.com/subscribe)

[Donate](https://www.jacobinmag.com/donate)

[Buy Swag](https://www.jacobinmag.com/store/)

[Advertise](https://www.jacobinmag.com/advertise)

designed by [Position Studios](http://positionstudios.com)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/09/higher-educations-aristocrats/
