-   [Log In](/myaccount/login?goto=/article/NYU-Eats-World/148979/) |
-   [Events](/section/Events/77/) |
-   [Store](https://chronicle-store.com/?PK=MHENAV&cid=henav)

[![image](/img/CHE_logo_785x28.png)](http://chronicle.com)

-   September 30, 2014

[Subscribe Today](/subscriptions/subscribe/?PK=M1224&cid=MH1WH1)

-   [Home](/section/Home/5/?eio=34361)
-   [News](/section/News/6/?eio=58977)
-   [Global](/section/Global/433/)
-   [Opinion & Ideas](/section/Opinion-Ideas/40/?eio=58977)
-   [Facts & Figures](/section/Facts-Figures/58/)
-   [Blogs](/section/Blogs/164/)
-   [Advice](/section/Advice/66/?eio=61142)
-   [Forums](/forums/)
-   [Jobs](https://chroniclevitae.com/job_search/new?cid=chenav)
-   Go

[The Chronicle Review](/section/The-Chronicle-Review/41/)
=========================================================

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   [![comment](/img/icn_comment.png)](/article/NYU-Eats-World/148979/#disqus_thread)

September 29, 2014

NYU Eats World
==============

An alumna laments the rise of an imperial university
----------------------------------------------------

![NYU Eats World 1](/img/photos/biz/photo_54795_portrait_large.jpg)

Melinda Beck for The Chronicle Review

[Enlarge Image](#)

![close](/img/close.gif) ![NYU Eats World
1](/img/photos/biz/photo_54795_portrait_wide.jpg)

Melinda Beck for The Chronicle Review

By Claudia Dreifus

New York University’s students arrived in August at an institution
embroiled in scandal.

Universities usually make headlines with sports-related meltdowns, but
NYU—the very model of the modern, inflating mega-university—was fending
off charges of outlandish payouts and perks to some high-level
executives, and of labor and human-rights abuses at its branch campus in
the Middle East.

This past May, Ariel Kaminer and Sean O’Driscoll, of *The New York
Times,*
[reported](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/19/nyregion/workers-at-nyus-abu-dhabi-site-face-harsh-conditions.html?action=click&contentCollection=N.Y.%20%2F%20Region&mod)
that South Asian migrant laborers building NYU’s gleaming new satellite
in Abu Dhabi worked as many as 12 hours daily, six or seven days a week,
while living as many as 15 to a room. After a strike protesting the
conditions, workers were beaten, jailed, and deported.

But that’s not all:

In June 2013 the
*Times*[reported](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/18/nyregion/nyu-gives-stars-loans-for-summer-homes.html?pagewanted=all)
that an NYU-related foundation had lent John Sexton, the university’s
president, at least $1-million to finance a beach house on Fire Island.
Some, if not all, of the loans had been forgiven. Sexton is paid
$1.5-million a year, plus perks.

Top NYU executives and star professors have
[received](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/18/nyregion/nyu-gives-stars-loans-for-summer-homes.html?pagewanted=all)
university-­connected financing for vacation homes in Bucks County, Pa.;
Litchfield County, Conn.; and the Hamptons. In some instances, portions
of these loans may have been forgiven.

In April the *New York
Post*[reported](http://nypost.com/2014/04/16/nyu-scion-scored-spacious-faculty-apartment-during-housing-squeeze/)
that Jed Sexton, adult son of the president, had spent five years in
subsidized faculty housing, near Washington Square. The younger Sexton
was, at the time, an aspiring actor and not a member of the NYU faculty.
And the arrangement was made in 2002, a period during which university
administrators were worried about a faculty-housing shortage.

The current U.S. secretary of the treasury, Jacob Lew,
[benefited](http://chronicle.com/blogs/ticker/jp/nyus-parting-gift-for-treasury-nominee-wasnt-unique)
from NYU’s generous real-estate policies. While serving as the
university’s executive vice president, Lew
[received](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/04/nyregion/nyu-gives-lavish-parting-gifts-to-some-star-officials.html?ref=education&_r=0)
a mortgage of $1.5-million from NYU, which had forgiven $440,000 by
2005, when he left for a top post at Citibank. Although his departure
was voluntary, Lew also received an unusual "exit bonus" of $685,000.

By May 2013 the faculty of four schools at NYU [had
voted](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/11/education/fourth-no-confidence-vote-for-the-president-of-nyu.html)
"no confidence" in Sexton. Only at the law school, where he’d once been
dean, did the professors
[affirm](http://www.nyunews.com/2013/04/04/law-2/) their support.
Nonetheless, Sexton does not plan to step down until 2016, when he will
[retire](http://www.thewire.com/national/2013/08/john-sexton-will-officially-leave-nyu-2016/68346/)
with a $2.5-million bonus, a professorship, and use of a
university-­owned apartment. His retirement package is worth nearly
$800,000 a year.

Paydays of that sort were unheard of when I arrived at NYU, in the
autumn of 1962.

I am a proud alumna, and the recent developments are painful. However,
the NYU that I attended was a far more modest place than the imperial
university into which it has evolved.

In the 1960s, NYU was already the largest private university in the
country, but it was a commuter school. It had only a few small
dormitories and no serious gym, and it accepted pretty much anyone who
applied. It gave students with quirky nontraditional talents a chance
they couldn’t find at places with more-rigid requirements.

Perhaps because it took all comers, the university had a middling
academic reputation. Still, because of where it was—in the heart of
Greenwich Village—it drew an interesting faculty. I received a wonderful
education there.

I can recall reading English dramatic literature with [John McCabe
III](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/1500778/John-McCabe.html),
part of a great American theatrical family. The Irish writer [Conor
Cruise
O’Brien](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/20/world/europe/20obrien-conor-cruise.html)
mesmerized in "Literature and Politics" with his recollections of W.B.
Yeats, who, apparently, had been in love with Dr. O’Brien’s aunt.

Evenings, after classes, I’d head to the Village Gate, on Bleecker
Street, to hear Nina Simone. Sometimes, en route to the subway, I’d stop
by the Limelight, where one could sing along with a Clancy brother or a
not-yet-famous Judy Collins. I was 19.

Here’s what I remember about my NYU. Yes, it could be somewhat
impersonal, but you could take from a rich intellectual smorgasbord as
much or as little as you wanted. Though at the time the $3,200 annual
tuition seemed steep, most middle- and working-class students found it
manageable. As far as I know, few of my classmates carried heavy student
debt; in fact, it was a rarity then.

Interestingly, in my four years at this low-status college, I can’t
remember ever being taught by a graduate assistant. In those days, NYU
wasn’t trying to be a research powerhouse. That meant that most of my
professors—though they certainly wrote—didn’t think of themselves
primarily as researchers. They viewed themselves as teachers, and they
were deeply involved in the intellectual development of their students.

My life was changed the day O’Brien said, "Claudia, you’re so
bright—have you ever thought of journalism?"

I was a working-class kid from Brooklyn, with a mixed academic record
and a vague interest in writing plays. NYU gave me polish and the chance
to figure it all out. Countless graduates can tell similar stories.

During its best moments, NYU was this giant escalator, lifting tens of
thousands of New Yorkers into the middle class—and some beyond.

In the 1980s, NYU began gentrifying. The goal was to upgrade from a
regional commuter school to a residential research university. Instead
of night-schoolers who arrived on the subway, the new freshmen would be
suburbanites who paid top dollar to live in dormitories.

There were hubristic dreams as well. The not-so-secret goal was to give
the Ivies a run for their money.

Though the rebranding was risky, it was the moment for such a move. All
of American higher education was beginning to change. Tuitions started
ascending, as did salaries of senior faculty members, and colleges
became more concerned with institutional growth than with education.

At the "new" NYU, all that happened on steroids. The university started
acquiring real estate at a frantic pace. It began a fund-raising blitz
to finance the purchases. Donors with money so new that it couldn’t buy
them much at more prestigious colleges were identified and cultivated.

New dormitory buildings, cornerstones of the transformation, were
purchased or built. NYU has
[23](http://www.nyu.edu/life/living-at-nyu/on-campus-living.html)
student residence halls and owns more than [2,000
apartments](http://www.nyu.edu/life/living-at-nyu/faculty-housing/Rentals.html)for
faculty and staff members. As the university grew, its footprint
expanded from Washington Square into Greenwich Village, from Union
Square to the edge of Soho, and deep into the East Village. In recent
decades, it has come to dominate those communities and much of Lower
Manhattan as well.

On the educational side, if NYU was going to compete with elite
colleges, it had to replicate what they had: prestige. Toward that end,
it raised both admission standards and tuition. Old institutions got new
names. The plain-vanilla School of Education, for instance, was
[upgraded](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steinhardt_School_of_Culture,_Education,_and_Human_Development#History)to
the Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and Human Development.

Although NYU always had well-known faculty members, an upscale research
university required "stars." And so big names were lured with Ivy-level
money. The university pays senior professors an average salary of
[$195,700](http://chronicle.com/article/2013-14-AAUP-Faculty-Salary/145679/#id=table)
now, with add-ons like a sabbatical every third year, subsidized
Manhattan apartments, and, in some cases, mortgage assistance for
country houses. (After word of that particular perk hit the news, the
Board of Trustees
[voted](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/15/nyregion/facing-criticism-nyu-will-cease-loans-to-top-employees-for-second-homes.html?_r=0)to
end it.)

It’s the students who have paid for those markers of prestige. Despite
John Sexton’s considerable fund-raising skills, NYU is a giant with a
meager endowment, which [costs
out](http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/09/09/upshot/09up-college-access-index.html?a&abt=0002&abg=1&_r=0)to
a mere $60,000 per student. By contrast, the ratio at Williams College
is $840,000 per head, and at Harvard $1,520,000. That means NYU is quite
dependent on tuition dollars for its cash flow. The current sticker
price for tuition, room, board, and fees comes to [about
$64,000](http://www.nyu.edu/content/dam/nyu/financialAid/documents/tuitiongeneral.pdf)
a year, making NYU one of the [costliest
universities](http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2013/08/the-expensive-romance-of-nyu/278904/)in
the United States. About [53
percent](http://projectonstudentdebt.org/state_by_state-view2013.php?area=NY)
of its students have taken out loans.

Meanwhile, [roughly 60
percent](http://www.nyu.edu/ir/pdf/cds/CDS_2013-2014%20UPDATED.pdf) of
the teaching staff is contingent.

Like so many American universities today, NYU has no discernable center,
no real purpose, except growth and a better spot on the *U.S. News*
rankings. The university attempts anything and everything—new programs,
new buildings, new schools, new types of perks for its stars. No one
seems to ask, "Can the students afford this?" Or, better yet, "Is this
wise?"

Nor is the grandiosity modulated by the personality of John Sexton, who
seems to be an empire builder by nature. The president’s signature
effort is something he terms ["Plan
2031,"](http://chronicle.com/article/NYU-President-May-Face-a/136253/)
which involves
[stake-claiming](http://www.nyu.edu/nyu2031/nyuinnyc/growth/the-plan.php#Intro)swaths
of Lower Manhattan, Governors Island, and Brooklyn.

"NYU needs to secure the space it requires in order to stay relevant and
rigorous," the university’s website [declares.](http://) But such rigor,
given the relatively small endowment, might come at taxpayers’ expense.
The university’s takeover of tens of thousands of square feet of prime
real estate would take that property off the tax rolls, weakening the
city’s financial base. What about New York City’s rigor?

Given that mentality, the road to Abu Dhabi was inevitable. Certainly,
American universities had long been sending students abroad for that
clichéd junior year in Tuscany. But NYU Abu Dhabi is the avatar of
something new: a branch of an American university, offering American
degrees, but funded by a foreign government. Sexton is evangelical about
the project, which he
[describes](http://nymag.com/news/features/46000/index4.html) as "an
opportunity to transform the university and, frankly, the world."

Only a few insiders know exactly how many petrodollars were spent on
this transformational opportunity. However, I happened to be at a dinner
a few years ago where the wine was flowing and a somewhat lubricated
high-up NYU official blurted out a number: $2-billion.

What is known is that the government of Abu Dhabi is picking up most, if
not all, of the tab. That’s for
[21](http://nyuad.nyu.edu/en/news-events/nyu-abu-dhabi-news/construction-of-nyu-abu-dhabis-campus-on-saadiyat-island-completed-on-schedule.html)
buildings, travel, accommodations and salaries for a rotating faculty, a
complement of imported administrative staff members, glitzy weekends for
prospective students from all parts of the world, and scholarships and
plane tickets for much of the student body—very few of whom are citizens
of Abu Dhabi.

Abu Dhabi, capital of the United Arab Emirates, is an authoritarian
monarchy awash in oil money. It’s also a country with a rocky
human-rights record. In 2010 a member of the royal family, Sheik Issa
bin-Zayed al-Nahyan, was
[acquitted](http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/01/11/abu-dhabi-royal-acquitted-in-torture-trial/)on
charges of torturing an Afghan grain merchant, this despite a
[videotape](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D0ZBepJ-zFk)of the incident.
Last year the UAE put 69 Emirati dissidents on
[trial](http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/01/23/uae-assaults-dissent-free-expression);
some were sentenced to up to 10 years in prison.

Given who is paying the bills, how does an American university maintain
academic freedom, the bedrock of the American system, at this offshore
branch? Not a problem, [says](http://nyuad.nyu.edu/en/about/faqs.html)
the university: "NYU Abu Dhabi enjoys full academic freedom as it exists
at NYU New York." On the other hand, "members of the NYU Abu Dhabi
community should be respectful of local culture and customs."

One local custom is censorship. Ominously, the presses in the UAE
[failed](http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/5/20/nytimes-uae-nyu.html)to
roll for the *International New York Times*on May 20, 2014. That was the
date the labor-abuse story was scheduled to appear in the regional
edition of the newspaper. Interestingly, the local printer/distributor
of the *Times*is a company [owned in
part](http://www.newsweek.com/uae-halts-printing-new-york-times-over-damning-nyu-labor-article-251495)by
the prime minister.

Back at Washington Square, the Abu Dhabi project has divided the
faculty. "The impact has been quite corrosive because of all this oil
money that has come sloshing over here," complains [Andrew
Ross,](http://sca.as.nyu.edu/object/andrewross.html) a professor of
social and cultural analysis who is also president of the NYU chapter of
the American Association of University Professors.

Ross says academic departments that have cooperated with the project by
sending faculty members to teach at Abu Dhabi are being rewarded with
six-figure grants from a discretionary fund, "while other departments
have zero. It’s created an enormous ill will."

Ross
[visited](http://www.buzzfeed.com/miriamberger/nyus-controversial-new-campus-in-abu-dhabi-still-has-a-labor#1u7oq57)Abu
Dhabi in March 2014 as part of a team from Gulf Labor, a human-rights
organization seeking to document working conditions at Saadiyat
("Happiness") Island, where the branch campus is located. "We didn’t
find it difficult to come across workers whose treatment wasn’t up to
par," Ross recalls. "We came back and told the administration. There
wasn’t an adequate response. In general, the administration is not
responsive to faculty pressure."

Or to inquiries from United States senators. Last year Charles Grassley,
an Iowa Republican on the Senate Finance Committee,
[told](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/11/nyregion/nyu-accused-of-impeding-compensation-inquiry.html?module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Ar%2C%7B%221%22%3A%22RI%3A8%22%7D)*The
New York Times*that he was being "stonewalled" in his efforts to learn
more about NYU’s extravagant executive-compensation policies. Grassley
sees the big payouts and the Abu Dhabi scandals as linked. "NYU’s stated
lack of knowledge, as reported in media accounts, of the reportedly poor
labor conditions in Abu Dhabi raises questions," he wrote me in an
email. "Where is the Board of Trustees in controversial matters? Does
the board sign off on vacation-home loans? Is the board independent and
doing its job to provide checks and balances on management and not
serving as a rubber stamp?"

In his first official statement on the exposé, President Sexton
[called](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/20/nyregion/nyu-apologizes-to-any-workers-mistreated-on-its-abu-dhabi-campus.html)the
working conditions at his branch campus, "if true as reported, troubling
and unacceptable." He wrote that "they are out of line with the labor
standards we deliberately set for those constructing the ‘turnkey’
campus being built for us on Saadiyat Island and inconsistent with what
we understood to be happening on the ground for those workers."

If it’s true as reported, to borrow Sexton’s phrase, that top university
administrators didn’t know of the abuses, that in itself is scandalous.
The Abu Dhabi development was under way, after all, in 2008.

"NYU can’t compete with Harvard in terms of endowment or basic
resources," Hilary Ballon, a senior administrator of NYU Abu Dhabi,
[told](http://nymag.com/nymag/features/46000/index2.html)*New
York*magazine in April of that year, after she was sent there to oversee
planning. "For NYU to become a world institution of higher education, it
has to imagine itself in a different paradigm. It has to do something
bold to get noticed."

Well, it certainly has. Still, as an alumna, I wonder what this bold
paradigm has done to NYU’s moral standing. Great universities are about
things more important than empire building and real-estate acquisition.
*The New York Times’*s**Upshot columnist, David Leonhardt, recently
published a
[chart](http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/09/09/upshot/09up-college-access-index.html?a&abt=0002&abg=1)ranking
the nation’s "most economically diverse top colleges." The good news for
NYU’s leadership was that it was among the top colleges. The bad news
was that it was listed in the bottom third. In my time there, I feel
sure, it would have ranked higher.

In 2010, Andrew Hacker and I published a**book positing that in the
search for growth and status, many American colleges were losing their
way. At the time, I couldn’t imagine my own alma mater emerging as a
prime example of our thesis.

But then what do I know? I attended a local commuter school where the
administration was content merely to educate its students.

*Claudia Dreifus is a journalist, an adjunct professor of international
affairs and media at Columbia University, and co-author, with Andrew
Hacker, of*Higher Education? How Colleges Are Wasting Our Money and
Failing Our Kids—and What We Can Do About It *(Henry Holt & Co., 2010).*

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   [![comment](/img/icn_comment.png)](/article/NYU-Eats-World/148979/#disqus_thread)

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

-   ### Commentary

    ![In Sexual-Misconduct Cases, Hear the Facts
    1](/img/photos/biz/photo_54423_landscape_medium.jpg)

    [In Sexual-Misconduct Cases, Hear the
    Facts](/article/In-Sexual-Misconduct-Cases/148783/)

-   ### The Chronicle Review

    ![Between Normalcy and War
    1](/img/photos/biz/photo_54365_landscape_medium.jpg)

    [Between Normalcy and War in
    Iraq](/article/Between-NormalcyWar-in/148745/)

-   ### Advice

    ![Can the Humanities Survive the 21st Century?
    1](/img/photos/biz/photo_6823_landscape_medium.jpg)

    [They Say I'll Never Get a
    Job](/article/They-Say-Ill-Never-Get-a-Job/148793/)

### Most Popular

-   [Most Viewed](#tabs1)
-   [Most Commented](#tabs3)

1.  [Why Academics' Writing
    Stinks](/article/Why-Academics-Writing-Stinks/148989/)
2.  [California Shifts to ‘Yes Means Yes’ Standard for College
    Sex](/article/California-Shifts-to-Yes/149057/)
3.  [NYU Eats World](/article/NYU-Eats-World/148979/)
4.  [How 'Yes Means Yes' Already Works on One
    Campus](/article/How-Yes-Means-Yes-Already/149055/)
5.  [What California’s New Sexual-Consent Law Means for Its
    Colleges](/article/What-California-s-New/149059/)

[Powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com/)

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/N272/ad/CHE_Articles_Featured_Job;sz=300x250;ord=[timestamp]?)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/N272/jump/CHE_Articles_Featured_Job;sz=300x250;ord=[timestamp]?)

JobsonVitae
-----------

Search 7,918 opportunities

#### Browse by Position Type

-   [All Types](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types)|
-   [Faculty/Research](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/1)|
-   [Administrative](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/88)|
-   [Executive](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/147)|
-   [Jobs Outside
    Academe](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/176)

#### Search by Keyword

Position Type All Types Faculty/ResearchAdministrativeExecutiveOutside
Academe

Keywords

Search

#### Top Jobs

[Head of
School](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847905-01?cid=topjobs)

Stamford American International School ...

[Assistant Professor of
Conservati...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849754-01?cid=topjobs)

Ohio University

[Visiting Assistant Professor
(Mat...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849396-01?cid=topjobs)

DePaul University

[Dean of the College of Arts and
S...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849698-01?cid=topjobs)

Shenandoah University

[Asst. or Assoc. Professor,
Theatr...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849440-01?cid=topjobs)

Kennesaw State University

[Clinical Assistant Professor of
H...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846895-01?cid=topjobs)

Texas A&M University

[Lecturer, Economics/Quantitative
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847677-01?cid=topjobs)

Kennesaw State University

[Associate Vice President of
Devel...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848317-01?cid=topjobs)

LSU Foundation

[Open Rank Position in Literacy
Ed...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848511-01?cid=topjobs)

University of North Carolina at Chapel ...

[Business Communication Full-Time
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848546-01?cid=topjobs)

Carnegie Mellon University

[The David & GG Farber
Distinguish...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849169-01?cid=topjobs)

Stevens Institute of Technology

[Assistant Professor
Biology](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848357-01?cid=topjobs)

Presbyterian College

[Vice President of Academic
Affairs](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848490-01?cid=topjobs)

Amarillo College

[Assistant
Professor](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849949-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Southern California

[Clinical Assistant Professor in
S...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848548-01?cid=topjobs)

Purdue University

[Nursing Faculty for RN-BSN and
MS...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849854-01?cid=topjobs)

California University of Pennsylvania

[USC Viterbi School of
Engineering...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848390-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Southern California

[Associate/Full Professor in
Child...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849713-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Georgia

[President](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848478-01?cid=topjobs)

Midwestern State University

[Information Literacy/Instruction
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848602-01?cid=topjobs)

Indiana University of Pennsylvania

[Associate Director of the Curb
Ce...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847999-01?cid=topjobs)

Vanderbilt University

[Multiple ANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW
BUSI...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848585-01?cid=topjobs)

Baylor University

[Chairperson of Curriculum and
Ins...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848223-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Houston

[Executive Vice President and
Chi...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847455-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Michigan

[College of Liberal Arts and
Scien...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846069-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

[Assistant Professor of Economics
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847516-01?cid=topjobs)

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

[Dean of the College of Arts &
Sci...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847064-01?cid=topjobs)

St. Ambrose University

[Full Professor - Chair
(Departmen...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846900-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Toronto

[Dean of the College of
Veterinary...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849400-01?cid=topjobs)

Kansas State University

[Penn State Altoona Tenure Track
P...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846343-01?cid=topjobs)

Penn State Altoona

[Assistant Dean and Director
Vacan...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846943-01?cid=topjobs)

Virginia Commonwealth University School...

[Executive
Director](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849817-01?cid=topjobs)

Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions

[Special Education Female Faculty
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847663-01?cid=topjobs)

Dar Al Hekma University

[Assistant/Associate/Full
Professor](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000850102-01?cid=topjobs)

Northeastern University

[Visiting Assistant Professor of
C...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848495-01?cid=topjobs)

Presbyterian College

[Assistant Professor in
Quantitati...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848209-01?cid=topjobs)

California State Polytechnic University...

[Assistant Professor in Public
Hea...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847757-01?cid=topjobs)

San Francisco State University

[Associate Dean for Research,
Jack...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848343-01?cid=topjobs)

Jackson School of Geosciences, Universi...

[Assistant, Associate, Professor
a...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848202-01?cid=topjobs)

Zirve University

[FSU Tenure-track faculty
position...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849739-01?cid=topjobs)

Florida State University, School of Inf...

[Assistant/Associate Professor of
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848891-01?cid=topjobs)

Grand Valley State University

[Assistant
Professor](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848196-01?cid=topjobs)

Sam Houston State University

[Assistant Professor in Biology
Ed...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847275-01?cid=topjobs)

Texas State University

[Jefferson Science
Fellowship](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846463-01?cid=topjobs)

The National Academies

[Clinical Assistant Professor of
B...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847715-01?cid=topjobs)

University of North Carolina at Charlotte

[Dean of the School of Online
Lear...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847604-01?cid=topjobs)

University of the Incarnate Word

[Biology tenure track position
Neu...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848827-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Pennsylvania

[Head of Department of Industrial
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849005-01?cid=topjobs)

The Hong Kong University of Science and...

[Vice President for Enrollment
Man...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847610-01?cid=topjobs)

Winona State University

[Nursing Program
Director](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846964-01?cid=topjobs)

Pima Medical Institute

[Vice President for University
Mar...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848173-01?cid=topjobs)

LeTourneau University

[Wenzhou-Kean University
Anticipat...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847611-01?cid=topjobs)

Wenzhou-Kean University

[Assistant Professor in the
Econom...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000850106-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Michigan

[Assistant Professor of Political
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849491-01?cid=topjobs)

California State University Bakersfield

[Regional Campus Punxsutawney
Libr...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848605-01?cid=topjobs)

Indiana University of Pennsylvania

[Dean of the Coggin College of
Bus...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848358-01?cid=topjobs)

University of North Florida

[President/Chief Executive
Officer](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848060-01?cid=topjobs)

Institute for Study Abroad, Butler Univ...

[LIBRARY & INFORMATION SCIENCE
FAC...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848363-01?cid=topjobs)

Rutgers University-New Brunswick

[Multiple
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847563-01?cid=topjobs)

California State University Channel Isl...

[Associate-Full Professor
positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848329-01?cid=topjobs)

Indiana University/School of Public Hea...

[Open-Rank Position in the Modern
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848790-01?cid=topjobs)

Brandeis University

[Korea University of Technology
an...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849680-01?cid=topjobs)

koreatech university

[Assistant Professor of Music
(Hig...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847855-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Texas at Tyler

[Vice President,
Communications](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847687-01?cid=topjobs)

Howard University

[Assistant Professor of
Biochemistry](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848503-01?cid=topjobs)

Hillsdale College

[Assistant Professor of Political
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848238-01?cid=topjobs)

Kennesaw State University

[Assistant
Professor](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848199-01?cid=topjobs)

Sam Houston State University

[SENIOR RESEARCH DIRECTORS
POSITIONS](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847181-01?cid=topjobs)

Arabian Gulf Institute

[Asst/Assoc Prof, Ed Psy;
Clinical...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847716-01?cid=topjobs)

Baylor University

[Asst./Assoc. Professor of
Informa...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848775-01?cid=topjobs)

Kennesaw State University

[Vice Chancellor for
Institutional...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847559-01?cid=topjobs)

Baton Rouge Community College

[Tenure-Track Position in Legal
St...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849048-01?cid=topjobs)

Oklahoma State University

[Assistant Professor of
Finance](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848325-01?cid=topjobs)

Washington State University

[Director of Public Safety &
Unive...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847913-01?cid=topjobs)

Indiana University of Pennsylvania

[Currey-Ingram Chair in
Literacy](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849705-01?cid=topjobs)

Vanderbilt University's Peabody College

[Tenure Track Educational
Leadersh...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848504-01?cid=topjobs)

University of North Carolina at Chapel ...

[Multiple
positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848392-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Tennessee

[Lundy Chair of the Philosophy of
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848582-01?cid=topjobs)

Campbell University

[Assistant Professor of English,
R...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848257-01?cid=topjobs)

Tiffin University

[Student Services Professional IB
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848336-01?cid=topjobs)

California State University, Chico

[Assistant Professor of Early
Chil...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849067-01?cid=topjobs)

Indiana University-Purdue University Fo...

[JOURNALISM FACULTY
POSITION](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848069-01?cid=topjobs)

Rutgers University-New Brunswick

[Tenure-Track in Communication,
Ra...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846912-01?cid=topjobs)

Rutgers University-New Brunswick

[Provost / Executive
Vice-Presiden...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848085-01?cid=topjobs)

Charles R. Drew University of Medicine ...

[Assistant Professor of
Industrial...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849835-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Rhode Island

[Assistant Professor - Curriculum
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848370-01?cid=topjobs)

Texas State University

[Assistant/Associate/Full
Professo...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849495-01?cid=topjobs)

Michigan State University College of Hu...

[DEAN OF THE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS
AD...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848630-01?cid=topjobs)

Widener University

[Assistant Professor in Molecular
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849498-01?cid=topjobs)

University of California, Riverside

[Kinesiology (Multiple Faculty
Pos...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848769-01?cid=topjobs)

California State University, Fullerton

[Department Head Search
(Departmen...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848545-01?cid=topjobs)

Purdue University

[Assistant Professor /Assistant
En...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849488-01?cid=topjobs)

University of California, Riverside

[Assistant Professor in
Microbiology](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849757-01?cid=topjobs)

Ohio University

[Multiple
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848035-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Minnesota, Morris

[Director of the School of
Transbo...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849829-01?cid=topjobs)

Arizona State University

[Assistant Professor of
Mechanical...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849884-01?cid=topjobs)

Kettering University

[Five Tenure Track
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846903-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Toronto

[Chair , Department of
Physics](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849347-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Alabama at Birmingham

[Vice President for Academic
Affairs](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848481-01?cid=topjobs)

Our Lady of the Lake College

[Open Rank, Tenure-Track
Positions...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848598-01?cid=topjobs)

Purdue University

[Assistant Professor of School
Cou...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848540-01?cid=topjobs)

Purdue University

[Dean of the School of
Nursing](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847587-01?cid=topjobs)

Wilkes University

[Dean, College of Liberal
Arts](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849090-01?cid=topjobs)

Texas A&M University

[Assistant Professor of
Communicat...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848298-01?cid=topjobs)

Franciscan University of Steubenville

[Multiple Faculty Positions:
Schoo...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848249-01?cid=topjobs)

Baylor University

[Asst. or Assoc. Professor,
Theatr...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849447-01?cid=topjobs)

Kennesaw State University

[Assistant/early Associate
Profess...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848791-01?cid=topjobs)

Lawrence University

[Faculty
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847930-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Iowa

[Multiple
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000844084-01?cid=topjobs)

Grand Valley State University

[Assistant Professor of Urban
Educ...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849047-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Tulsa

[Composer & Director of
Instrument...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848355-01?cid=topjobs)

Occidental College

[Assistant/Associate Professor of
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848981-01?cid=topjobs)

California State University, Northridge

[Tenure-Track Faculty
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848382-01?cid=topjobs)

California State University, East Bay

[Chief Information
Officer](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848412-01?cid=topjobs)

Lycoming College

[Vice President for Academic
Affai...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849449-01?cid=topjobs)

Viterbo University

[Director of Human
Resources](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847830-01?cid=topjobs)

LSU Health Sciences Center - New Orleans

[Post-doctoral Fellowship in the
S...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849407-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Michigan Lieberthal-Rogel...

[Vice President for Extended
Learning](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846764-01?cid=topjobs)

Northern Michigan University

[Dean of Undergraduate Admission
a...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848842-01?cid=topjobs)

Hamline University

[Post-Doctoral Fellowship
Program](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848809-01?cid=topjobs)

Cornell University

[one to two (1-2) faculty
position...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846969-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Washington

[Associate Professor/Professor of
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000849100-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Tulsa

[Indiana University Art Museum
Dir...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848394-01?cid=topjobs)

Indiana University

[Health Science (Multiple Faculty
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848770-01?cid=topjobs)

California State University, Fullerton

[Assistant Professor of
Finance](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848810-01?cid=topjobs)

Massachusetts Institute of Technology S...

[Dean of Humanities, Arts &
Biblic...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846095-01?cid=topjobs)

Taylor University

[Director, School of Gender, Race
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000846724-01?cid=topjobs)

Portland State University

[2014-15 FACULTY RECRUITMENT
MULT...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848136-01?cid=topjobs)

University of California Santa Cruz

[Assistant/Associate Professor,
He...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848655-01?cid=topjobs)

Yale School of Public Health

[Multiple
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000847793-01?cid=topjobs)

Eastern Illinois University

[Strathclyde Chancellor’s
Fellows...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848586-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Strathclyde

[Computer Science
Position](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000848554-01?cid=topjobs)

Carnegie Mellon University

[](#) [](#)

[Post a Job](https://careers.chronicle.com/webbase/index.jsp)

In print and online today

### Academe Today

[Daily e-newsletter](# "Newsletter sign-up"). Keep up with all that's
happening in higher education with a free Chronicle report, e-mailed to
you every weekday morning.

[![image](/img/photos/biz/NLSignupButton.png)](# "Newsletter sign-up")

![Chronicle of Higher Education](/img/logo-small.png)

-   1255 Twenty-Third St, N.W.
-   Washington, D.C. 20037
-   Copyright © 2014 The Chronicle of Higher Education

-   [Twitter](http://twitter.com/chronicle)
-   [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/chronicle.of.higher.education)

-   [About The Chronicle](/section/About-the-Chronicle/83)
-   [Advertise](/section/Advertise/86)
-   [Contact Us](/section/Contact-Us/88/)

-   [Help](/section/help/87)
-   [Site Map](/sitemap)
-   [Privacy Policy](/article/Privacy-Policy/1612/)
-   [User Agreement](/article/User%20Agreement/47435/)

-   [Log In](/myaccount/login?goto=/article/NYU-Eats-World/148979/)
-   [Get Newsletters](/section/Newsletters/85)

[Subscribe Today](/subscriptions/subscribe/?PK=M1224&cid=MH2WF1)
![subscribe today](/img/subscribe-footer.png)

Get the insight you need for success in academe.

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=728x90;ord=201409301429)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=728x90;ord=201409301429)

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=336x280,300x250,300x600;ord=201409301429)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=336x280,300x250,300x600;ord=201409301429)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://chronicle.com/article/NYU-Eats-World/148979/
