-   [Log In](/myaccount/login?goto=/article/Capital-Man/146059) |
-   [Events](/section/Events/77/) |
-   [Store](https://chronicle-store.com/?PK=MHENAV&cid=henav)

[![image](/img/CHE_logo_785x28.png)](http://chronicle.com)

-   April 21, 2014

[Subscribe Today](/subscriptions/subscribe/?PK=M1224&cid=MH1WH1)

-   [Home](/section/Home/5/?eio=34361)
-   [News](/section/News/6/?eio=58977)
-   [Global](/section/Global/433/)
-   [Opinion & Ideas](/section/Opinion-Ideas/40/?eio=58977)
-   [Facts & Figures](/section/Facts-Figures/58/)
-   [Blogs](/section/Blogs/164/)
-   [Advice](/section/Advice/66/?eio=61142)
-   [Forums](/forums/)
-   [Jobs](https://chroniclevitae.com/job_search/new?cid=chenav)
-   Go

[The Chronicle Review](/section/The-Chronicle-Review/41/)
=========================================================

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   [![comment](/img/icn_comment.png)](/article/Capital-Man/146059/#disqus_thread)

April 17, 2014

Capital Man
===========

Thomas Piketty is economics’ biggest sensation. He’s also the field’s fiercest critic.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Piketty](/img/photos/biz/photo_49657_portrait_large.jpg)

Ed Alcock / M.Y.O.P

[Enlarge Image](#)

![close](/img/close.gif)
![Piketty](/img/photos/biz/photo_49657_portrait_wide.jpg)

Ed Alcock / M.Y.O.P

By Emily Eakin

The French economist Thomas Piketty arrived in Washington, D.C., on
Sunday for a week of talks at some of the nation’s leading
policy-research centers but which might as well have been billed as a
victory lap up the East Coast. The English translation of Piketty’s new
book, *Capital in the Twenty-first Century*, a formidably rigorous,
700-page history of wealth, out barely five weeks, had just made *The
New York Times’s* best-seller list. But even before it appeared, on the
strength of a handful of advance reviews and a surge of Internet buzz,
Piketty’s transformation was complete: from respected researcher on
income distribution to ranking heavyweight, a scholar who, armed with
reams of data and charts—and, unusual for an economist, a gilded
tongue—proposed to upend decades of mainstream wisdom on inequality
though an unprecedented analysis of the past.

*The Economist*
[declared](http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2014/01/inequality/)
that Piketty’s book may "revolutionize the way people think about the
economic history of the past two centuries" and started an online
reading group to discuss it chapter by chapter. The British magazine
*Prospect* added Piketty to its annual list of the most influential
world thinkers, and his book was said to be making the rounds in the
office of Ed Milliband, the British Labour Party leader. Documentary
filmmakers were vying for the chance to turn the book into a movie; a
composer was seeking Piketty’s blessing to make it an opera.

Now the 42-year-old Frenchman had come, like a wonkish heir to de
Tocqueville, to tell Americans how to salvage what he called their
"egalitarian pioneer ideal" from a potentially devastating "drift toward
oligarchy." His anointment was all the more remarkable in that he
intended his book not just as a novel argument about inequality but as a
pointed rebuke to his field—in particular its American wing.

On Monday, Piketty’s stops included the White House Council of Economic
Advisers, the Government Accountability Office, and the office of the
Treasury secretary, Jacob Lew, who summoned him for a private sit-down
to discuss his proposal for a progressive tax on wealth. On Tuesday, he
appeared in the company of Nobelists: George Akerlof, who, introducing
Piketty to a group at the International Monetary Fund, declared that he
had "entered rock stardom—economist-style"; and Robert Solow, who, at
the Economic Policy Institute, where a crowd of several hundred had
braved a freezing downpour to hear Piketty talk, praised the originality
of his argument and the "sheer collection, presentation, and analysis"
of his data, predicting that "we’re going to be digesting that for a
long time."

Piketty weathered the fuss with a modest smile. He wore a gray suit
jacket but no tie, and with his close-cropped dark hair, clean-scrubbed
round face, and unassuming demeanor, he suggested less a rock star than
a particularly earnest graduate student. Speaking without notes for 45
minutes at a stretch, in rapid-fire English as engaging as his prose, he
eagerly laid out his findings. "The top of the wealth distribution has
been rising at 6 to 7 percent per year—three times faster than the world
economy," he told the audience at the Economic Policy Institute. "Nobody
knows where this will stop."

The boldness of Piketty’s thesis is belied by its apparent simplicity:
Inequality is intrinsic to capitalism, and, if not forcefully combatted,
is likely to increase—to levels that threaten our democracy and fail to
sustain economic growth. Karl Marx predicted much worse—runaway
inequality leading ultimately to social collapse—and Piketty takes care
to distinguish his view from Marx’s apocalypse. Even so, his thesis runs
directly counter to mainstream economic theory, which holds that
inequality should eventually decline, a process known as "convergence."

According to Piketty, whose data on income and wealth span three
centuries and 20 countries, the forces of convergence (the spread of
knowledge and skills, for example) are considerable, but those of
divergence have typically had the upper hand. The crux of his argument
is a deceptively simple formula: *r \> g*, where *r* stands for the
average annual rate of return on capital (i.e. profits, dividends,
interest, and rents) and *g* stands for the rate of economic growth. For
much of modern history, he contends, the rate of return on capital has
hovered between 4 and 5 percent, while the growth rate has been
decisively lower, between 1 and 2 percent. (Piketty makes a compelling
case that economic growth, which depends in good part on population
growth, is unlikely to accelerate dramatically anywhere but in Africa,
given current demographic trends.) Thus he adduces capitalism’s
"principal destabilizing force": Whenever *r \> g*, "capitalism
automatically generates arbitrary and unsustainable inequalities that
radically undermine the meritocratic values on which democratic
societies are based."

In other words, in a slow-growing economy, accumulated wealth grows
faster than income from labor. So the rich, who already hold most of the
wealth, will get richer, while everyone else, who depend mostly on
income from their jobs, will be lucky to keep up with inflation.
Countries in which *r \> g* constitute much of the developed world
today, including the United States, where the wealthiest 10 percent
account for more than 50 percent of the national income, and which, if
Piketty’s right, may fast be becoming the world’s worst offender. Across
the West, he writes, the levels of inequality "are increasing at a rate
that cannot be sustained in the long run and that ought to worry even
the most fervent champions of the self-regulated market." (In Piketty’s
scheme, the self-regulated market is by definition an *r \> g* regime:
"the more perfect the capital market [in the economist’s sense], the
more likely *r* is to be greater than *g*.") Impressed by Piketty’s
juxtaposition of *r* and *g*, Solow remarked, "So far as I know, nobody
had ever fastened on that before."

The notable exception to the reign of *r \> g* is the period between
1945 and 1970, capitalism’s so-called Golden Age, also known as the
"great compression," when the economies of Western Europe and the United
States expanded and inequality declined. It’s no coincidence, Piketty
suggests, that this period spawned modern economics’ optimistic credo: a
free market delivers dividends to all. That mantra, he insists, is based
on an illusion. Viewed in historical context, the Golden Age reveals
itself to have been an aberration—a transient exception to the gloomy *r
\> g* rule. Two World Wars and the Great Depression, accompanied by
"confiscatory" tax rates imposed on the rich to pay for the war effort,
severely reduced many family fortunes, temporarily narrowing the gap
between the upper and lower classes. Where convergence theory declared
that inequality follows a bell curve, declining as an economy matures,
Piketty found the converse to be true: inequality in the 20th century
describes an inverted bell curve—a U-shape—whose steep upward climb now
shows no signs of abating.

Apparently bedazzled by the book’s arguments, few reviewers mentioned
its assault on the field. Yet Piketty’s disdain is unmistakable, the
lament of a scholar long estranged from the mainstream of his
profession. "For far too long," he writes, "economists have sought to
define themselves in terms of their supposedly scientific methods. In
fact, those methods rely on an immoderate use of mathematical models,
which are frequently no more than an excuse for occupying the terrain
and masking the vacuity of the content. Too much energy has been and
still is being wasted on pure theoretical speculation without a clear
specification of the economic facts one is trying to explain or the
social and political problems one is trying to resolve."

Piketty’s first published paper appeared in the *Journal of Economic
Theory* in 1993, when he was 22. It consisted of a mathematical model
for designing an optimal income tax schedule—and featured abundant
references to game theory, Pareto optimality, and Bayesian equilibriums.
A precocious math student, Piketty had entered the elite École Normale
Supérieure, in Paris, at 18, and by the time he turned 22 had a Ph.D. in
economics and job offers from MIT, Harvard, and the University of
Chicago. "They were very excited because I was a machine proving
theorems, and they liked that," Piketty told me. He chose MIT and moved
to Cambridge, Mass. He stayed just two years.

He liked living in the United States and his colleagues at MIT, and it
was exciting to teach graduate students, who were mostly older than he
was. "At the same time that I was very happy, I was thinking that
something strange was going on," he recalled. The problem, he quickly
concluded, was that he "knew nothing at all about economics."

He continued to publish theorems on income distribution but increasingly
wondered how inequality looked in the real world. How had it evolved
over time? "I realized that there was a lot of data out there that had
never been used in a systematic way," he said. As a student, he’d been
as interested in history and sociology as in economics, admiring the
work of Pierre Bourdieu, Fernand Braudel, and Claude Lévi-Strauss.
Piketty’s parents, who never finished high school, had joined the
student protests of 1968, and, as a teenager, Piketty spent a summer
working for a grandfather—"an entrepreneur with a strong capitalist
ethic"—who owned a stone quarry outside Paris. Yet greater influences on
his development, he believes, were the dramatic events taking place in
Eastern Europe. The year he entered the École Normale, the Berlin Wall
fell, and by the time he left the Soviet Union had collapsed as well.
"It was natural and important to me to ask the question: What can we say
about inequality and social justice and the dynamics of distribution
under capitalism? Why is it that people thought at some point that
communism was necessary?"

Piketty’s colleagues showed little interest in historical research.
"What I found quite surprising when I was at MIT was that sometimes
there was a level of arrogance with respect to other disciplines in the
social sciences, which is really quite incredible," he said. "In the
case of income distribution, which is what I was interested in, we had
almost no historical facts about which we knew anything. I found the gap
between the self-confidence of the profession and the actual achievement
of the profession quite astonishing."

Or, as Branko Milanovic, senior scholar the Luxembourg Income Study
Center at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, and an
early champion of Piketty’s book put it to me, "There is this sterility
to the mathematical models, which are not grounded in reality but in
what somebody imagines the behavior of people to be. Economics has lost
its taste to address big issues. We have gone into tiny issues, the
extreme of which is *Freakonomics*, which addresses the behavior of sumo
wrestlers and why drug dealers live with their mothers. In Spain we have
25-percent unemployment, and you’re discussing sumo wrestlers!"

In one sense, critiques of the discipline are nothing new. Economists, a
voluble lot, seem to occupy a disproportionate amount of the
blogosphere, and spend a good deal of their time there engaged in heated
methodological debate. In a high-profile spat in March, Paul Krugman and
Lars P. Syll, an economist at Malmö University, in Sweden, posted rival
views of IS-LM (for investment saving-liquidity money), a model that has
been a mainstay of macroeconomic theory for decades. Syll dismissed
IS-LM as a "brilliantly silly gadget." Krugman defended it as "a
simplification of reality designed to provide useful insight into
particular questions. And since 2008 it has done that job, yes,
brilliantly." (In a follow-up post, Krugman was more circumspect: "You
should use models, but you should always remember that they’re models,
and always beware of conclusions that depend too much on the simplifying
assumptions." )

Still, it’s one thing to trade barbs online, and quite another to
present your magnum opus as an act of methodological sedition. *Capital
in the Twenty-first Century*, Piketty makes clear, is his notion of what
economics scholarship should look like: combining analyses of macro
(growth) and micro (income distribution) issues; grounded in abundant
empirical data; larded with references to sociology, history, and
literature; and sparing on the math. In its scale and scope, the book
evokes the foundational works of classical economics by Ricardo,
Malthus, and Marx—to whose treatise on capitalism Piketty’s title
alludes. The sizable recent literature on various aspects of inequality
earns barely a mention. "There is a fair amount of empirical work out
there," says James K. Galbraith, of the University of Texas at Austin
who studies wage inequality and who published one of the few skeptical
reviews of the book to date, in *Dissent*. "He has a tendency to make
deferential reference to mainstream thinkers while ignoring the
critiques that already exist."

By contrast, the novels of Jane Austen, Balzac, and Henry James merit a
section of their own. Piketty goes so far as to extrapolate, from a
close reading of Balzac’s *Père Goriot*, a phenomenon he calls
"Rastignac’s dilemma," to denote the fact that throughout the 19th
century, marrying into inherited wealth was a much surer—and perfectly
acceptable—route to a comfortable life than trying to get ahead by dint
of one’s talent, education, and hard work. Today, Piketty writes,
prime-time shows like *House*, *Bones*, and *West Wing* "feature heroes
and heroines laden with degrees and high-level skills" and appear to
celebrate "a just inequality, based on merit, education, and the social
utility of elites." But this, he says, may be so much wishful thinking:
the number of huge bequests has fallen since the Belle Époque, yet in
Europe, and to a lesser extent in the United States, the amount of
inherited wealth has rebounded to that historic level and in Piketty’s
view continues to wield a distorting effect on our democracy.

No doubt the book’s accessible eloquence has been a boon to its
reception. One critic, noting Piketty’s ironic wit, compared his
footnotes to Gibbon’s. (A typical aside: "Among the members of these
upper-income groups are U.S. academics and economists, many of whom
believe that the economy of the United States is working fairly well,
and, in particular, that it rewards talent and merit accurately and
precisely.") But Piketty has also benefited from excellent timing.

After leaving MIT in 1995, Piketty returned to Paris and spent the next
three years in the basement archives of the French Finance Ministry,
culling income, inheritance, and tax-law data from crumbling dossiers.
The result of that research was his first book, *Les haut revenues en
France au XXe siècle: inégalités et redistribution, 1901-1998* (*The Top
Incomes in France in the 20th Century: Inequality and Redistribution,
1901-1998),* in which he first discovered the U-shaped curve describing
inequality in 20th-century France. Piketty says that he would not have
written the book had he stayed at MIT—or at least not until he had
tenure. "I wanted to return to France because I wanted to get closer to
historians and sociologists," he told me. "My feeling was that if I
stayed at MIT, I would have strong incentives to keep doing what I was
good at, which was math theorems."

He sent the book to Anthony Atkinson, an eminent scholar of income
inequality at the University of Oxford who has since become a
collaborator. Atkinson proposed that Piketty extend his study to other
countries. He returned to MIT for a semester in 2000, and while there
recruited Emmanuel Saez, then a graduate student in economics, to
collaborate with him on a study of income data from the United States.
Other researchers on income distribution tended to rely mainly on
self-reported household surveys; Piketty used federal income-tax
returns, which were introduced in 1913, and which provide a much more
accurate picture of incomes at the top.

He wasn’t the first to use such data. Simon Kuznets, author of the
influential bell-curve theory of inequality in the 1950s, had also
relied on income-tax returns. But his data covered only the period
between 1913 and 1948—when inequality declined—and Kuznets himself was
more circumspect about the value of his "Kuznets curve" than many of his
followers, whose zeal Piketty ascribes to Cold War geopolitics. "When
the competition between the Soviet model and capitalist model was very
strong, people in the West so much wanted to believe that market
economies could bring a reduction in inequality and could bring a
balance of distribution of income and wealth," he told me. With
characteristic modesty, Piketty suggested that his main advantage as an
economist was to have been born into a generation for whom "the conflict
between communism and capitalism no longer really exists." However, for
many disciples of Kuznets, the demise of the Soviet Union seems mostly
to have reinforced their faith. In 2011, a committee of leading
economists voted the 1955 paper in which Kuznets introduced his famous
curve one of the top-20 most influential articles published in *American
Economic Review*.

Piketty’s innovation was to extend Kuznets’s work across many more
decades and countries, at a time when most economists, if they relied on
empirical data, focused on just a few decades and mostly on wages, not
wealth. Or else they obtained their data through controlled experiments
rather than through historical research. "What’s actually quite strange
is that this has not been done before," Piketty says of his long-range
analysis. "It’s too historical for economists and too economic for
historians. It’s a kind of academic no-man’s land."

In 2003, Piketty, who had become a professor at the École des Hautes
Études en Sciences Sociales, and Emmanuel Saez published their findings
on income inequality in the United States. Once again, the data yielded
a U-shaped curve over the course of the 20th-century. (If anything,
Piketty says, their analysis underestimates the rate of inequality
today, given that many top capital holders sequester their wealth in tax
havens overseas, where it goes unreported.) At first, their paper
provoked little comment. That year, Robert E. Lucas Jr., a Nobel
Prize-winning economist at the University of Chicago, declared that "of
the tendencies that are harmful to sound economics, the most seductive,
and in my opinion the most poisonous, is to focus on questions of
distribution." Lucas, a supply-side enthusiast, urged faith in the
long-term benefits of economic growth: "The potential for improving the
lives of poor people by finding different ways of distributing current
production is nothing compared to the apparently limitless potential of
increasing production."

Five years later, with the collapse of the real-estate market and
revelations of predatory lending practices and bloated CEO compensation
at investment banks, inequality was suddenly news. Early in 2009, the
Obama administration featured, in an overview of the president’s budget,
a graph from Piketty and Saez’s research showing the steep upward climb
of national income going to the top 1 percent. Seizing on the graph,
*The Wall Street Journal* christened it "the Rosetta Stone to the
presidential mind of Barack Obama," thus helping to promote the idea (no
doubt exaggerated) of Piketty and Saez’s influence in the White House.
In May 2011, the Columbia University economist Joseph E. Stiglitz
reported in *Vanity Fair* that the top 1 percent of Americans now
controlled 40 percent of the country’s wealth, making "the 1 percent" a
household term and a resounding epithet for the Occupy movement, which
took off that fall. Two years later, Robert Reich, the former labor
secretary who is now a professor at Berkeley, cited Piketty and Saez’s
work—and gave Saez a cameo—in his popular documentary, *Inequality for
All*.

By last December, as word of Piketty’s book, already out in France,
began to spread, inequality as a political topic had undergone a
transformation of its own: from pet obsession of the liberal left to
bipartisan priority. That month, President Obama devoted a major speech
to the subject, calling inequality "the defining challenge of our time."
Prominent Republicans, including House Majority Leader Eric Cantor and
Senator Marco Rubio, soon followed suit, delivering speeches that
invoked, however cautiously, income inequality (Rubio’s on the 50th
anniversary of President Lyndon B. Johnson’s "War on Poverty" address),
and the Senate finance committee held a hearing on the plight of the
middle class.

Whether *Capital in the Twenty-first Century* survives its spectacular
debut to become an inspiration for future scholarship—let alone future
policy—will depend in part on how Piketty’s data and interpretation hold
up over time. The grumblings of dissent here and there have yet to
coalesce into a powerful rebuttal. (Appearing with Piketty on a panel in
Washington, Kevin Hassett, an economist at the American Enterprise
Institute, argued that if you factor in after-tax government transfers,
like food and welfare subsidies, to lower-income groups in the past 30
years, these virtually compensate for the increase in income in the top
20 percent. To which Piketty replied, "It’s true there has been a big
rise in transfers. But I’m surprised that someone like you, at the AEI,
is happy that transfers are decreasing inequality.") Even detractors
agree that the [World Top Incomes
Database](http://topincomes.g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/), which
Piketty and his collaborators have assembled at the Paris School of
Economics, where he now teaches, is invaluable. Covering 30 countries to
date, it is by far the largest international database on inequality.

Less likely to endure is Piketty’s remedy for inequality: a progressive
global wealth tax on fortunes over 1-million euros.

In Washington, a policy town, remedies were what many of Piketty’s
commentators wanted to talk about, and they tended to dismiss his
proposal, while taking the opportunity to promote their own ideas
instead. Even Piketty concedes that enforcing a global wealth tax would
require unprecedented levels of international cooperation and, at least
in the United States, where higher taxes are widely believed to lead to
lower growth, overcoming entrenched political opposition. Still, in his
book he makes an impassioned case, noting that, after all, the United
States invented the concept of confiscatory taxation—back in 1919, when
Congress introduced a top marginal income-tax rate of 77 percent—out of
a conviction that huge incomes and estates were "socially unacceptable
and economically unproductive." (Today the top U.S. income-tax rate is
about 40 percent.) Piketty’s argument recently got an indirect boost
from a much-discussed study published in February by the International
Monetary Fund, hardly a radical body. The study, a multicountry analysis
of income inequality, found not only that there is "scant evidence that
typical efforts to redistribute"—taxes and credits—"have on average had
an adverse effect on growth," but that lower inequality was generally
associated with faster growth." As Jonathan D. Ostry, the study’s lead
author, put it in an email to me, "this logic was indeed an eye opener
for us."

On Wednesday evening, Piketty was in New York, on a panel at CUNY with
more Nobelists: Joseph Stiglitz (who has won two) and Paul Krugman,
along with Steven Durlauf, an economist at the University of Wisconsin
at Madison. Among the audience at CUNY’s auditorium in midtown were two
dozen reporters. So great was the media interest in Piketty that
reporters were assigned to a designated seating area, and a press room
was set aside for them to interview him at the end of the evening.

Earlier that day, he had appeared at the Council on Foreign Relations
and the United Nations, but at CUNY he was among his own kind:
academics. He looked delighted. "The United States of America invented
progressive taxation largely because they didn’t want to look like
class-ridden Europe," he said as, still tieless but beaming broadly, he
showed the audience a Power Point graph tracing the fluctuations in the
top income-tax rate.

The other panelists were effusive in their praise. "This is a fantastic
book!" Krugman crowed. "It solves problems that people have worried at
for decades." "Some of us went to graduate school at a particular point
on his curve, when things were looking very good" Stiglitz said
ruefully. "It gave us a distorted view of the world."

In their excitement over Piketty’s ideas about inequality, they
occasionally waded into technical terrain—stochastic modeling and
marginal-productivity theory were invoked more than once. But they were
just as eager to discuss his remedy, the global wealth tax. "We have
some Supreme Court decisions that basically say that corporations are
people in terms of their ability to spend money on politics but not in
terms of their accountability," noted Stiglitz. "It’s not going to be an
easy battle." Krugman cited Theodore Roosevelt’s "New Nationalism"
speech of 1910, in which he called for progressive income and
inheritance taxes on "big fortunes." That speech, Krugman suggested, is
a reason to feel hopeful that Americans might one day decide to combat
inequality again. "The pessimistic view is that the 20th-century
narrowing of inequality is entirely the result of wars," he said. "But,
in fact, Teddy Roosevelt was giving that speech before the war, which
says that a democratic political system which believes in ideals is
capable of reforming itself in the absence of catastrophe."

Piketty was still smiling when he was escorted from the stage. A roomful
of reporters awaited him, and, after that, a fancy dinner. Then he would
be on his way—next stop Boston.

*Emily Eakin, a former senior editor at*The New Yorker*, is working on a
book about contemporary medical culture.*

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   [![comment](/img/icn_comment.png)](/article/Capital-Man/146059/#disqus_thread)

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

-   ### Commentary

    ![In the Courts, an Imperfect Solution
    1](/img/photos/biz/photo_49377_landscape_medium.jpg)

    [In the Courts, an Imperfect Solution to Segregation’s Long
    Shadow](/article/In-the-Courts-an-Imperfect/145865/)

-   ### Chronicle Review

    ![6031-Academic-Celebrities-Main](/img/photos/biz/photo_49335_landscape_medium.jpg)

    [The New Academic
    Celebrity](/article/The-New-Academic-Celebrity/145845/)

-   ### Advice

    ![Careers -- Editors
    Authors](/img/photos/biz/photo_44415_landscape_medium.jpg)

    [The Lonely Decision](/article/The-Lonely-Decision/145871/)

### Most Popular

-   [Most Viewed](#tabs1)
-   [Most Commented](#tabs3)

1.  [Capital Man](/article/Capital-Man/146059/)
2.  [Confronting the Myth of the 'Digital
    Native'](/article/Confronting-the-Myth-of-the/145949/)
3.  [Microflipping: a Modest Twist on the 'Flipped'
    Classroom](/article/Microflipping-a-Modest-Twist/145951/)
4.  [As Researchers Turn to Google, Libraries Navigate the Messy World
    of Discovery Tools](/article/As-Researchers-Turn-to-Google/146081/)
5.  [Sticking With a High-Tuition, High-Aid Model, College of Wooster
    Makes the Case to Its
    Board](/article/Sticking-With-a-High-Tuition/145875/)

[Powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com/)

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/N272/ad/CHE_Articles_Featured_Job;sz=300x250;ord=[timestamp]?)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/N272/jump/CHE_Articles_Featured_Job;sz=300x250;ord=[timestamp]?)

JobsonVitae
-----------

Search 7,092 opportunities

#### Browse by Position Type

-   [All Types](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types)|
-   [Faculty/Research](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/1)|
-   [Administrative](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/88)|
-   [Executive](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/147)|
-   [Jobs Outside
    Academe](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/position_types/176)

#### Search by Keyword

Position Type All Types Faculty/ResearchAdministrativeExecutiveOutside
Academe

Keywords

Search

#### Top Jobs

[Senior Director of Residential
Li...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827294-01?cid=topjobs)

West Texas A&M University

[Faculty
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827299-01?cid=topjobs)

Liberty University

[Psychology
Position](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828590-01?cid=topjobs)

Elmira Colllege

[Provost](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000826735-01?cid=topjobs)

Clemson University

[Executive
Director](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827028-01?cid=topjobs)

Nebraska's Coordinating Commission for ...

[College of Business (multiple
Pos...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827497-01?cid=topjobs)

Jackson State University

[Dean](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828054-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Alabama

[Assistant Professor Human
Develop...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827275-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Houston

[Lecturer in Technical
Communication](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827297-01?cid=topjobs)

IUPUI (Indiana University-Purdue Univer...

[Vice Provost for Student
Success](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827434-01?cid=topjobs)

Middle Tennessee State University

[Full Time Adminstrative Faculty
&...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827290-01?cid=topjobs)

Piedmont Virginia Community College

[Dean, the Kimmel
School](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827280-01?cid=topjobs)

Western Carolina University

[Instructor, Aviation Electronics
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828111-01?cid=topjobs)

Guilford Technical Community College

[President](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828572-01?cid=topjobs)

Delaware Technical Community College

[Assistant Professor of
Management...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828356-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Alaska Southeast

[Vice Chancellor for Marketing &
C...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827399-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Missouri

[Faculty Positions Fall Term
2014](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827637-01?cid=topjobs)

Eastern Iowa Community Colleges

[Assistant/associate Professor
Glo...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827393-01?cid=topjobs)

Georgetown University

[Associate Dean for Academic
Affairs](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828453-01?cid=topjobs)

Texas A&M Health Science Center College...

[Chancellor](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827811-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Texas System

[Assistant Professor of Public
Adm...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828354-01?cid=topjobs)

University of Alaska Southeast

[Project Director, Career
Technica...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827846-01?cid=topjobs)

Advanced Technology & Education Park

[Division Chair, Science,
Technolo...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828138-01?cid=topjobs)

Guilford Technical Community College

[Director, Program in Nursing
Science](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828360-01?cid=topjobs)

University of California, Irvine

[Chancellor](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827367-01?cid=topjobs)

Carlos Albizu University

[Assistant Dean for Institutional
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827416-01?cid=topjobs)

Sentara College of Health Sciences

[Multiple
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828353-01?cid=topjobs)

Guilford Technical Community College

[Multiple
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827763-01?cid=topjobs)

Il.isag.vik College

[Assistant/associate/full
Professo...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827265-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Houston

[Dean of the Business
School](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828092-01?cid=topjobs)

Midway College

[Director for the Division of
Eart...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827374-01?cid=topjobs)

National Science Foundation

[Executive Vice President for
Acad...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828129-01?cid=topjobs)

Clemson University

[Executive Vice President for
Acad...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827181-01?cid=topjobs)

York Technical College

[Dean of Advanced Technology and
A...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827845-01?cid=topjobs)

Saddleback College

[Vice President for Institutional
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827833-01?cid=topjobs)

Virginia State University

[Executive Director of
Healthforce...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827818-01?cid=topjobs)

Winona State University

[Multiple
Positions](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827427-01?cid=topjobs)

Oglala Lakota College

[Assistant/associate Professor
Met...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828595-01?cid=topjobs)

The University of Alabama

[Visiting Clinical Instructor in
S...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828862-01?cid=topjobs)

Purdue University

[Instructor/assistant Professor
of...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000828721-01?cid=topjobs)

Hiram College

[Dean, Construction & Industrial
T...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827816-01?cid=topjobs)

Pitt Community College

[Vice President for Institutional
...](https://chroniclevitae.com/jobs/0000827219-01?cid=topjobs)

North Central Missouri College

[](#) [](#)

[Post a Job](https://careers.chronicle.com/webbase/index.jsp)

In print and online today

### Academe Today

[Daily e-newsletter](# "Newsletter sign-up"). Keep up with all that's
happening in higher education with a free Chronicle report, e-mailed to
you every weekday morning.

[![image](/img/photos/biz/NLSignupButton.png)](# "Newsletter sign-up")

![Chronicle of Higher Education](/img/logo-small.png)

-   1255 Twenty-Third St, N.W.
-   Washington, D.C. 20037
-   Copyright © 2014 The Chronicle of Higher Education

-   [Twitter](http://twitter.com/chronicle)
-   [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/chronicle.of.higher.education)

-   [About The Chronicle](/section/About-the-Chronicle/83)
-   [Advertise](/section/Advertise/86)
-   [Contact Us](/section/Contact-Us/88/)

-   [Help](/section/help/87)
-   [Site Map](/sitemap)
-   [Privacy Policy](/article/Privacy-Policy/1612/)
-   [User Agreement](/article/User%20Agreement/47435/)

-   [Log In](/myaccount/login?goto=/article/Capital-Man/146059)
-   [Get Newsletters](/section/Newsletters/85)

[Subscribe Today](/subscriptions/subscribe/?PK=M1224&cid=MH2WF1)
![subscribe today](/img/subscribe-footer.png)

Get the insight you need for success in academe.

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=728x90;ord=201404211632)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=728x90;ord=201404211632)

[![image](http://ad.doubleclick.net/ad/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=336x280,300x250,300x600;ord=201404211632)](http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/opinion.che/review;abr=!aol;sz=336x280,300x250,300x600;ord=201404211632)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
https://chronicle.com/article/Capital-Man/146059
