[](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/)

Site Builder Report
-------------------

-   [Website Builders Guide](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/)
-   [Tools I
    Recommend](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/tools-i-recommend)
-   [Plugins](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/plugins)
-   [Blog](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/blog)
-   [Search](javascript:;)

[Blog Home](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/blog)

Hi [I’m Steve](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/p/about-us) and this is
my blog about the web. I also write a [guide to choosing a website
builder](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/).

If you'd like, you can [follow me on Twitter
here](https://twitter.com/stevebenjamins).

![Culture](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/blogs/featured_images/000/000/031/large/Culture.jpg?1400183535)

How to Cultivate Culture in Online Communities
==============================================

Written by [Steve
Benjamins](https://plus.google.com/117484937810110356280) on May 12
2014.

In 2013, a team of researchers [noticed something
strange](http://www.popsci.com/article/science/trolls-their-natural-habitats-analysis-comments-ted-talks)
about Ted Talk videos hosted on Youtube: the Youtube comments were far
more likely to include personal insults or to focus on the presenter
rather than the content of the presentation (compared to the same talks
hosted on ted.com).

If you’ve used Youtube before I doubt this surprises you.

![Youtube comments are notoriously
bad.](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/030/original/Ted-Youtube-comment.jpg?1399910730)

Youtube comments are notoriously bad.

But it begs an interesting question: why are people mean and insulting
on some websites and reasonable and civil on others?

It has a lot to do with the *culture* of a website.

A culture is a loose set of beliefs a user has about who belongs and
what is appropriate to say on a website.

Culture is tricky because it isn’t something that you can *design* per
say. Instead it’s something you can only try to *cultivate*.

Here’s some tactics I’ve seen websites use to to cultivate a culture.

1. Signal who belongs and who doesn’t
-------------------------------------

![image](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/022/original/le-cinq.jpg?1399904440)

The above photo is what you see as you enter the Le Cinq restaurant in
Paris. Do you notice how everything has a gold hue? Or that the glasses
and plates all seem very expensive? Or how the well-dressed waiter is
holding his arm behind his back as he pours a drink?

All these details are signalling who belongs in this restaurant (and who
doesn’t). And this is the power of a first impression.

That’s why when you go to [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/),
you only see intelligent, nuanced development questions highlighted on
their homepage:

![image](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/029/original/stack-homepage.jpg?1399905749)

Stack Overflow is a community for professional developers, and they are
trying to signal who belongs by highlighting these questions.

Do questions about ***passing an AJAX request into a PHP array*** get
you excited? That’s good. Stack Overflow wants you to say: “awesome,
these are my people!”

Or do questions like this bore you? That’s also good: Stack Overflow is
trying to build a community of helpful developers, and if these
questions bore you, you may not be a great fit.

### 2. Charge users a fee to join

Something strange happens after we’ve paid for something: we almost
instantly become more invested in it.

That’s why people who pay cover end up staying at a bar longer ([the
sunk cost fallacy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunk_costs)).

Or why you might feel guilty for failing to read books you’ve paid for.

Or why contributing to a Kickstarter project makes you feel so much more
invested in its outcome.

Charging someone for something is a way to make them instantly more
invested in it. I’ve seen this done in a few places:

[Ask MetaFilter](http://ask.metafilter.com/) is a unique, laid-back
community forum that charges a $5 membership fee. The people willing to
pay the membership fee are generally also willing invest in the making
the community civil.

The [Micropreneur Academy](http://www.micropreneur.com/) is a forum for
entrepreneurs that charges members $47 / month. The cost per month
incentivizes members to frequently come back and contribute (people want
to recoup their investment). It also sets up a minimum standard for
membership (you should be willing to invest $47 / month).

*Note: Both the Micropreneur Academy and Ask MetaFilter seed their
communities from other sources. Ask MetaFilter members often come to the
site through MetaFilters main site. Micropreneur members generally come
to the community through the Startups for the Rest of Us podcast.*

### 3. Reward ideal behaviour

If you want to know how to incentivize ideal behaviours, ask a
kindergarten teacher:

![image](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/024/original/kindergarten.jpg?1399904736)

All of us respond to rewards. Even contrarians who will do the opposite
of what is rewarded, are still reacting against rewards.

That’s why the NY Times highlights ideal reader comments in a section
they call *NYT Picks*:

![image](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/025/original/nyt-picks.jpg?1399904907)

Highlighting ideal reader comments does two important things:

1.  It models an example of ideal behaviour for all other readers to
    see.
2.  It provides feedback to the commenter so that they know they are
    contributing in a positive way (which can feel satisfying).

*Interesting note: It also subtly suggests a hierarchy in which the
NyTimes editors are curators of reader comments (and thus the “experts”
in the discussion).*

### 4. Don’t try to gamify great content

Quora is on a mission to share the worlds knowledge. That’s why so many
of their mechanics revolve around incentivizing great questions and
answers (for example: suggested edits from other readers, answer upvotes
etc.).

It’s also why they eschew extrinsic rewards such as leaderboards, badges
or karma scores.

Instead Quora tries to attract users who enjoy sharing knowledge for the
genuine intrinsic reward of content creation. That’s the culture they
believe will lead to great content.

*Interesting note: Unlike many social networks, Quora users can comment
anonymously. This is because Quora cares more about the quality of your
content than they do your identity.*

![Quora user on why he gives high quality
answers](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/031/original/quora.jpg?1399911558)

Quora user on [why Quora users gives high quality
answers](http://www.quora.com/Why-are-people-more-willing-to-give-comprehensive-and-high-quality-answers-on-Quora-compared-to-Yahoo-Answers).

### 5. Treat your biggest contributors

One of the secrets to Yelp is their [Elite
Squad](http://www.yelp.com/elite). Elite Squad members are handpicked by
Yelp community managers for being helpful and friendly contributors.

And once you’re in the Elite Squad, Yelp does a lot to make sure you are
happy.

One of the cooler ways Yelp does this is by throwing parties at local
hotspots for Elite Squad members. These parties often include free
alcohol, free food and other cool perks (like free massages and swag).

![Anecdotally, I have a few friends who are in the Elite Squad and they
speak highly of these
parties.](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/026/original/yelp.jpg?1399905054)

Anecdotally, I have a few friends who are in the Elite Squad and they
speak highly of these parties.

### 6. Tirelessly close poor discussions

In my experience people are more likely to litter if they see someone
else get away with it. So one way to reduce litter is to clean it up
before it gets out of control.

![image](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/027/original/litter.jpg?1399905281)

The same is true of a culture. Every poor discussion is a signal to
users that inappropriate behaviour is tolerated. Closing these
discussions is a good way to remove those signals.

That’s why on Stack Overflow there are five different ways a question
can be closed- they know it’s a way to cultivate a better community in
the long-run.

![Reasons Stack Overflow questions are
closed.](http://s3.amazonaws.com/sitebuilderreport-assets/images/files/000/000/028/original/delete.png?1399905345)

Reasons Stack Overflow questions are closed.

### Conclusion

Culture is like a plant. It’s not something you can design or control.
Instead it is something you cultivate.

Hopefully these tactics provide you some ideas on how to cultivate an
ideal culture.

If this topic interests you, I’d suggest watching [Joel Spolskys talk on
the Cultural Anthropology of Stack
Overflow](http://businessofsoftware.org/2013/07/the-cultural-anthropology-of-stack-exchange-joel-spolsky-at-business-of-software-conference-2012/).
I saw this talk at Business of Software 2013 and this article owes a lot
to that talk.

\
\

\

[Follow me on Twitter](https://twitter.com/builderreport)

-   [Back to Top](#logo)
-   [Reader
    Testimonials](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/p/testimonials)
-   [Contact](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/p/contact-us)
-   [About](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/p/about-us)
-   [I'm Hiring!](http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/p/write-for-us)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.sitebuilderreport.com/blog/6-ways-to-cultivate-culture-on-a-website
