[![TuxRadar](/themes/tuxradar/tuxradar.png "TuxRadar")](/)

-   [Latest News](/)
-   [Podcast](/podcast)
-   [Features](/features)
-   [Distros](/distros)
-   [Code](/code)
-   [Apps](/apps)
-   [Convert
    Corner](/content/open-ballot-have-you-converted-anyone-linux)
-   [Distro
    Picker](http://tuxradar.com/content/distro-picker-0 "Discover your perfect distro!")

[![image](/files/rss-small.png)](http://www.tuxradar.com/rss)

[![image](/themes/linuxformat/banner.png)](https://play.google.com/store/magazines/details/Linux_Format?id=CAowwZ-hAQ)

Take the Linux Filesystem Tour
==============================

Posted at 11:31pm on Saturday March 14th 2009

![LXF](/files/icons/lxf.png)\

Well, hello! Welcome to the Linux Filesystem Tour. My name is Manuel
Page, and I will be your guide today. I and my bus driver, Hal D., are
very pleased to have you on board. Just a couple of safety announcements
before we start off - please keep your hands inside the bus at all
times, and don't delete anything you might see along the way, unless
you're sure you know what you're doing. OK, off we go!

We're starting our tour in the root directory, and I suppose you might
say this is the, er, high point of the tour, because it's right at the
top level of the directory hierarchy. (I don't write the jokes, folks, I
just read this script.)

Interestingly, the root directory is the only directory that doesn't
have a name. Most people will tell you it's called /, but it isn't
really. It's just that when we write down an absolute path name, we
start with /, and in the case of the root directory, there's nothing
else to write - we're done.

As we set off, on our left you'll notice a directory called /root. This
is a little confusing: it isn't the root directory, it's just a
directory called root. It's actually the private property of the system
administrator. In fact, it's the super-user's home directory.

I have an uncle who's the system administrator of a Solaris system, and
he's always complaining that he doesn't have a private home directory.
His home directory is /, and he hates it. How would you like to have to
hang your washing out to dry in the town square? Can we take a look in
/root, Hal? Oh, apparently not - Colonel Linux says no. Well, there's no
harm in asking, but /root is one of the few directories for which
ordinary users don't have read permission.

Generally speaking, Linux permissions implement a 'look but don't touch'
policy. The main exception is in a user's home directory, where they can
do whatever they want.

Understanding the root partition
--------------------------------

One of the principles guiding the organisation of the filesystem is to
allow it to be split across multiple disk partitions (or multiple disks)
in a rational manner, and to allow appropriate pieces of it to be shared
between machines. Key to this is the notion of the root partition.

When Linux boots, the kernel attaches a single filesystem partition all
by itself. This is known as the root partition. Any other partitions
that need to be attached are mounted by the mount command, usually under
control of entries in the file /etc/fstab. Because in the early stages
of startup, only the root filesystem is available, it must contain
everything needed for the system to function and attach the other pieces
of the filesystem.

Tools on the root partition include the init program (which starts all
the other processes), a shell, mount and the /etc/fstab file. The File
System Hierarchy standard specifies a number of directories that must
lie within the root partition.

Speaking of Colonel Linux, our next port of call is /boot, which is
where the colonel lives, so get your cameras or Print Screen buttons
ready. He has a file there called something like vmlinuz-2.6.19, which
is the (compressed) image of the Linux kernel. When Linux is booted, the
boot loader (usually Grub) brings this file into memory and starts it
running.

You'll also notice a file there called something like initrd-2.6.19.img,
which is an initial RAM disk image. It contains the modules the kernel
needs when it's booting, before it can access the filesystem by itself.
Don't delete these files, folks, or we won't be able to reboot. Do you
want to put me out of a job?

Ah, the guys on the back row have noticed a directory called lost+found.
Well done, guys! You'll see a directory of this name at the top level of
any partition that contains an ext2 or ext3 filesystem. What's it for?
Well, you might think it's a meeting point for stray BSD visitors, ha
ha, but it's there for a program called fsck, which checks the
consistency of the filesystem.

If fsck finds a file that appears to be intact but doesn't actually have
a name, it will create an entry for it in lost+found. To be honest, this
hardly ever happens nowadays, so lost+found is probably just an empty
directory. Just leave it alone, and stop worrying about it.

Configuration city
------------------

All right, coming up on your right you'll see a directory called etc.
Historically, we think the name just stood for 'et cetera' (literally
'and other things'). This was the place to put all the stuff that didn't
seem to fit anywhere else. We used to be able to stop off here for hot
dogs, but nowadays it has become the home for a large collection of
system configuration files and scripts.

Some of these files are critically important; for example, /etc/passwd
contains the account information for all the locally-defined logins
(including root's). You'll also notice /etc/inittab there, which tells
init what to do (init is a really special program because when Linux
boots, it's the only program that gets started automatically by the
kernel. It's responsible for starting all the other services, including
the ones that let you log in.)

Also important is /etc/fstab, which tells us which other filesystems
should be mounted. You probably don't mess with any of these unless you
know what you're doing; errors in these files might prevent the system
from booting or stop you from logging in.

While in /etc you'll find the configuration files for various network
services - there's /etc/xinetd.conf, which configures xinetd, and
/etc/syslog.conf, which configures syslog. All of these files are plain
text files, by the way, so the only tool you really need to configure
Linux is a text editor. My preferred editor is Vi, but then Hal says I'm
weird in other ways, too.

As /etc passes out of view on our right, you'll see /home coming up on
the left. This is our residential district. Under here, you'll find the
home directories of individual users. For example, Hal's home directory
is /home/hal (isn't that right, Hal?).

This is generally a pretty smart neighbourhood, but it's up to
individual users what they do under here. Some folks scatter everything
around in the one directory, others are really organised with things
kept in multiple levels of carefully-named folders.

By default, file permissions under /home allow you to list and examine
other users' files, but you can't change them. Of course, individual
users can tighten the permissions if they wish. Young Tom has a
directory called /home/tom/photos on which only he has read permission.
Tom, we'd all love to know what's in there...

Now, Hal likes to speed through /mnt. It's not very exciting, folks, I'm
afraid - just an empty directory to temporarily mount other filesystems
on to. Right next to /mnt we come to /media. This directory contains
sub-directories that are used as mount points for removable media such
as floppy discs or CD-ROMs. Probably the younger ones among you won't
remember floppy discs? Anyway, the idea is that the hotplug system
mounts media on to here automatically when they're inserted.

We've stopped going in there on the tour, ever since an alarming
incident last month when Hal drove into /media/cdrom, just to prove it
was empty. Then someone shoved a CD in, the hotplug daemon woke up, and
wallop - suddenly this entire hierarchy of holiday snaps opened up in
front of us. Gave us the willies, I can tell you.

The virtual part of the tour
----------------------------

Ah, now, the directory we're coming up to, /proc, is really interesting
because it doesn't actually exist. All the files in here are just a
figment of the kernel's imagination - they don't correspond to any
information that's actually spinning round on the disc.

Colonel Linux was explaining to me the other week that he had all these
internal data structures to keep track of things like memory usage and
lots of per-process information like their environment variables. In the
olden days, commands like ps (which displays information about running
processes) used to fish around inside the memory image of the kernel to
snag the information it needed.

The colonel wasn't too wild about this - he said that it felt like
having a postmortem performed on you while you were still alive. So he
came up with the idea of making this information available as if it were
a collection of files. That way, programs can find the information they
need just by opening and reading these imaginary files, just like they
would open and read any other file.

Hal's going to drive into /proc so we can look around. You can get a
hint that there's something weird about /proc because if you do an ls -l
in here most of the files have zero length, but if you examine their
content with cat or less, they're not empty!

As I said, the so-called files in here show us the content of internal
kernel data structures as plain text. For example, the file cmdline
shows us the arguments that the kernel was booted with. The file cpuinfo
shows us what the kernel knows about the CPU (or CPUs) it's executing
on. The file meminfo tells us more about the virtual memory system that
we probably wanted to know. And so on.

Sorry, madam, would you mind sitting down? Hal's just going to take this
tight bend to show you a collection of directories with names like
'3412'. These names are process IDs, and their directories contain yet
more imaginary files that provide access to per-process information.

There is actually some documentation on all of this (try man 5 proc for
details), but much of the information is at too low a level to be
intelligible to the average tourist. In most cases, it's better to use
programs like top and ps, which will show you the per-process
information in a more digestible form.

Mostly, we think of /proc as a read-only file system, but in fact there
are some 'files' under /proc/sys that contain various kernel-tuning
parameters that you can adjust by writing to them. For example, we can
reduce a parameter called TCP FIN TIMEOUT from 60 to 50 like this:

~~~~ {.command}
# cd /proc/sys/inet/ipv4
# cat tcp_fin_timeout
60
# echo 50 > tcp_fin_timeout
# cat tcp_fin_timeout
50
~~~~

OK, hands up those of you who don't have the faintest idea what a TCP
FIN TIMEOUT is, or why you might want to adjust it? Yes, most of you. I
thought as much. For 99% of us, the best thing is to leave this stuff
alone.

Just down the street from /proc we come to /sys. This is another of
those 'imaginary' filesystems. It was added to the 2.6 kernel to make it
easier for kernel-level code, such as device drivers, to exchange data
with programs running in user space.

The hierarchy under /sys enables you to see the hardware environment
(the busses, devices and so on) that the kernel has discovered, but
unless you're rewriting, say, the Linux hotplug subsystem, you should
probably ignore it entirely. There is a book /proc et /sys, written by
Olivier Daudel and published by O'Reilly, that documents all this... in
French.

![Highlights of the filesystem
tour](/files/LXF95.feat_filesystem.diagram.png)

Highlights of the filesystem tour

Toilet stop
-----------

We're going to visit /dev now. 'Dev' is short for 'devices', and there
are some strange critters living in here. They don't really behave like
ordinary files. If you do an ls -l in here and look carefully, you'll
see a 'b' or a 'c' as the first character on the line.

The b's are so-called block devices and represent devices that are
block-structured and can be randomly accessed - usually this means disk
partitions. For example, this little guy just here, /dev/hda1, is the
first partition on the first hard drive. He's a block device.

On this system, hda1 is the root partition (it might be different on
your machine depending on how you installed it); in fact, everything
we've visited so far on our tour sits on the partition represented by
this guy, so he's kept pretty busy. As soon as you click on Shutdown,
he's looking forward to a bath, cocoa and bed.

On the left you'll see a large number of what are known as 'tty' devices
(hi, guys!). They're character devices, representing character-based
terminals. For example, Linux is typically configured to support six
virtual terminals. From your graphical desktop you can reach them with
the key combinations Ctrl+Alt+F1 through Ctrl+Alt+F6 (and you can get
back to the desktop with Ctrl+Alt+F7). Anyway, these six virtual
terminals are the devices /dev/tty1 through /dev/tty6.

History lesson
--------------

The name 'tty' originally stood for 'teletype'. A teletype was a
mechanical typewriter-style printing device with a keyboard. One model
in particular, the ASR33, was extremely popular on mini-computers in the
1970s, when even Colonel Unix was still in adolescence and Colonel Linux
was just a twinkle in his father's eye. Teletypes are long gone, but the
name has stuck. Nowadays, a tty is a character-based screen of some
sort.

Moving on, straight ahead of the bus lives a very strange guy called
/dev/null. He lives in that cave with the dark entrance. As we get
closer you can see it has 'Abandon hope all ye who enter here' inscribed
around the cave entrance. We've seen folk go in there, but no one ever
comes out. Some people call it a black hole and use it to throw away
unwanted output from programs. Er, we seem to be getting a little close
to the entrance, Hal. Don't go in... you'll never... don't go in, Hal.
Turn around...!

Phew, that was close.

The gritty side of town
-----------------------

Well, after all that imaginary stuff I'm sure you'd like to see some
real files again, and there are plenty of them over here in what I think
of as our industrial estate, made up of the two directories /bin and
/sbin. For bin, think "binary" - most of what you'll see in here are
executable programs.

Why are there two? Well, the idea is that stuff that ordinary users
might want to use, such as Vi and tar and rm and date, lives in /bin,
whereas things that only the super-user is likely to want to use are in
/sbin. You can think of the 's' in /sbin as standing for 'system' or
perhaps 'super-user'.

For example, ifconfig (which sets network card parameters) and iptables
(which establishes firewall rules) are in /sbin, because only root is
allowed to do those things. On most Linux distributions, /bin is
included on the search path for a normal user account but /sbin is not.
Of course, ordinary users can easily access these commands using full
path names such as /sbin/iptables, but it won't do them a lot of good
because most of these commands won't let you do anything unless you're
root.

There's an important corner of our industrial estate called /lib.
Actually it's rather a large corner. 'Lib' stands for 'library', and the
files in here are shared libraries required by the system programs in
/bin and /sbin. (If you're from a Windows world you will know them as
DLLs.) One critically important library that's used by practically
everything is the standard C library, libc.so. If you chose to delete
this file, almost everything would instantly stop working.

While we're still looking at our industrial estate, we're going to end
our tour by taking a quick look inside a very important directory called
/usr. I should warn you that /usr is usually on a different partition,
so you may feel a bit of a bump as we cross the mount point. Go slow
please, Hal!

As we look around in /usr, we see directories that seem to repeat some
of those in the root directory. In particular we see /usr/bin, /usr/sbin
and /usr/lib. Indeed, these do contain the same sort of stuff that we
saw in /bin, /sbin and /lib earlier. That is, /usr/bin contains
user-level commands, /usr/sbin contains system administration commands,
and /usr/lib contains libraries.

So why is this stuff spread across two separate sets of directories? The
answer is to do with partitioning. The stuff in /usr is often on a
separate partition, which doesn't get attached into the filesystem until
a relatively late stage in the boot process. Those really critical
components used in the early stages of booting must lie within the root
partition, not in /usr.

Splitting stuff up in this way also keeps to a minimum those parts of
the filesystem that need to be intact to do a single-user boot. The
stuff in /bin, /sbin, and /lib is needed, but the stuff in /usr isn't.
It's also possible to mount /usr into the filesystem read-only, for
improved security, and on a network it may be possible to share /usr out
from a single file server, at least among machines sharing a common
hardware architecture.

Actually, it turns out that the great majority of executables and
libraries live in /usr, and relatively few in the root partition. A
check on the disk space usage of the system I'm currently running looks
like this:

~~~~ {.command}
$ du -sh /bin /sbin /lib /usr/bin /usr/sbin /usr/lib
4.9M    /bin
6.3M    /sbin
109M    /lib
92M     /usr/bin
5.7M    /usr/sbin
625M    /usr/lib
~~~~

The figures you'll see on your own system will be different of course,
but the general message will be the same: most stuff is under /usr, and
the root partition can be relatively small.

There are a few directories like /var and /tmp and /opt that we haven't
visited, but I know I have to get you back in time for you to catch a
few big downloads at the FTP mirrors, so we'll return to the root
directory where we began and close our tour. Take care getting off the
bus. We hope you'll spend a few minutes in our souvenir shop, where you
can buy public key rings with a plastic Tux on the fob and postcards
that say 'I did an ls -R of /proc and survived!'. So long!"

Filesystem flora and fauna
--------------------------

There are seven kinds of 'creature' living in the filesystem. When you
do a long directory listing (ls -l), the very first character of each
line tells you the type of creature you're looking at. These are shown
in the first column of the table. We also did a population count of each
type on an Ubuntu system; these figures are shown in the second column.
Of course, as they used to say in the car adverts, "your mileage may
vary".

Type

Population

Description

-

102,314

An ordinary file. This is by far the commonest type.

d

14,701

Directory. A directory is a container for other entries. Some people
call them folders.

l

15,258

A symbolic link. These are tiny files that contain the name of some
other file, similar to a shortcut in Windows. So if I have, for example,
a symbolic link from /etc/motd to /var/run/motd, and a program opens
/etc/motd, the kernel says, "Aha, that's a symbolic link. He doesn't
really mean /etc/motd, he means /var/run/motd", and it opens that
instead. Symbolic links are sometimes called symlinks or soft links.

c

785

A so-called character device (also sometimes called a raw device or a
character special file). These entries serve to give names to devices.
Some, like /dev/console, correspond to actual physical devices. Others
correspond to pseudo-devices; for example, /dev/random provides access
to the kernel's random number generator.

b

65

A block device. Block devices are most commonly disks - /dev/hda2, say,
is partition 2 on hard drive a. Generally speaking, a character device
supports reading and writing of a sequential byte stream, and a block
device supports random access. The real distinction, however, is that
the kernel provides a layer of buffering for block devices so that they
are read and written a complete block at a time. It does not do this for
character devices. Practically all device files live in /dev.

s

34

Unix-domain sockets. These are named 'communication endpoints' in the
filesystem. They are used in a slightly similar way to TCP and UDP
sockets, except that they only support inter-process communication
between processes running on the same machine.

p

7

Named pipes. These are so rare they should be on the endangered species
list! Like Unix-domain sockets, they are named endpoints used for
inter-process communication.

[![First published in Linux
Format](/files/lxf.png)](http://www.linuxformat.com)

First published in [Linux Format magazine](http://www.linuxformat.com)

You should follow us on [Identi.ca](http://identi.ca/tuxradar) or
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/tuxradar)

\

Your comments
-------------

### thanks

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 15, 2009 @ 1:16am

tossed this into my rss-reader recently and I'm very glad I did :)

### Awesome Article

DIS (not verified) - March 15, 2009 @ 7:56am

That was an awesome article! I love how you made it into a story kind of
a way, that was the best part.\
 Could you do a story like about the kernel, or the boot sequence? Thank
You. Keep up the awesome work.

### thank you for this article

onaogh (not verified) - March 15, 2009 @ 11:21am

this tour gave me a good view on GNU/Linux filesystem, i am looking to
find some book that speaks about linux in more details. can somebody
refer me to it.

### Great article... as always!

Tux in Quebec (not verified) - March 15, 2009 @ 2:06pm

Thanks again for making Linux / Unix simple to everyone...! Since I got
the RSS feed, I really appreciate everything you post... and gladly
refers others to read it.

Keep up the good work !

### This is brilliant. An

billythekid (not verified) - March 15, 2009 @ 5:58pm

This is brilliant. An excellent way of describing Linux to a newbie.

Thanks Very Much!

### Excellent stuff, but what about

mogwai (not verified) - March 15, 2009 @ 8:33pm

debian/\*buntu-based systems?\
 Don't get me wrong, I think this is great, but could you have included
little snippets where debian/\*buntu differs?\
 I first noticed this when I read about the /etc/inittab file; Ubuntu
doesn't seem to have one!

But, by all means, keep pumping out the material! I just can't get
enough!

### i really had to lol at the

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 15, 2009 @ 10:49pm

i really had to lol at the Hal D. bus driver part.

btw nice entry!!

### Very informative and written

vijay (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 12:13am

Very informative and written well..thanks..

### LSB

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 12:27am

Good article. You should attach to LSB when describing the hierarchy.

### Finally a simple,

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 1:27am

Finally a simple, meaningfull and full explanation!

### Thanks

newbie (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 2:13am

Thanks for the great read

### Excellent but Title should have been Linux Directory Structure

Reza (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 4:08am

This really an exellent in depth explanation of Linux OS directory
structure. I have to compliment the style of the writting. However, I
believe the Title is little misleading since the article does not really
focus on the FileSystem rather the Directory Structure which could be in
any of the standard Filesystems used by popular Distros.

### wowser

Very impressed youngun (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 4:32am

This article is fantastic, thank you for writing it. For someone who not
only wants to understand the OS but how a computer can/does work this is
a great piece to filter out all the extremely technical talk that passes
over newbies heads alot. More articles like this may be the key to
helping people realise there's more to life then windows XD

### Great start

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 1:21pm

I would say this is a great start to make average window users buried
under C: and D: myth, to get comfortable with unix/linux way of storing
files.

Please continue this as a series with more articles covering things
right from command line, configuration files till using some common
applications.

### sbin

ioccs (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 2:54pm

sbin means STATIC bin, orginally.

### Thanks!

james (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 4:20pm

Thanks for the great read

### Thanks

KnownPenguin (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 5:42pm

Thanks

### Just the right amount of text

ragnarroeck (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 7:02pm

You kept it compact, to avoid that "oh my god, 3 pages, I'll read that
later" (and then don't) effect. And still it's very informative and
entertaining. Something most of online tutorials miss, making then like
chewing a dog treat. I will bookmark this and pass it to people who
converted to linux, confused by the "new" directories.

### nice

Artesia (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 7:59pm

Thanks for this, there's some stuff in here that I haven't read in other
articles about the file structure. They tend to skip over the
directories that contain files the user doesn't configure, and I like
that I now have an idea of what happens in some of those. And especially
thanks for the graphical representation of the file tree.

And by the way the writing was really cute!

### Very good!

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 8:08pm

Really, very good. Liked it very. Funny stuff. Informative. Veryn
pleasant reading. Congrats.

### Wonderful article !

Sathish paul (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 8:49pm

Thanks for putting up such a brief and informative article. It really
helps newbies like me to understand what goes on under the covers.
Hopefully this is just the beginning of a what-happens-in-linux series
of articles. Looking forward for more like these !!

Cheers,\
 paul

### This is a fantastic article!!! Thank you!

David J Smith (not verified) - March 16, 2009 @ 9:47pm

This is GREAT for beginners AND a great refresher for advanced users.
The humor is a nice touch and keeps the read going smoothly the whole
article. :) Thanks much!

### Very Informative Post :)

Kang tatang (not verified) - March 17, 2009 @ 1:30am

Very Informative Post :)

### Simply the best I've seen!

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 17, 2009 @ 3:48am

Well done.

### Really nice

Lakshmipathi.G (not verified) - March 17, 2009 @ 5:00pm

really good -hope to see more linux stories/articles from you.

### great!

Pre10dr (not verified) - March 17, 2009 @ 9:43pm

very well written! Thanks for packing the information in such a nice
readable package.

### Helpful

Non Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 18, 2009 @ 10:49am

It's important to have the knowledge, but it isn't less important to
know to transmit the information in clear words.\
 Thanks.

### Creative writing!!!

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - March 21, 2009 @ 1:19am

Wonderful read...and good humor!!\
 Keep up the good work and do post more of the same style of writing
with other topics!

### WoW

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - April 15, 2009 @ 2:11pm

I have spent ages looking for this... something I can understand as a
newbie to Linux... thanks to this I will definately continue my foray
into the unknown world you so clearly understand.. I reckon you have
single handedly promoted Linux in a significant way...good on you and
thanks very much

### etc

tinkertim (not verified) - July 26, 2009 @ 1:52pm

On /etc , its also a recursive acronym:

(e)tc stores (t)ext (c)onfigurations, similar to GNU is not Unix.

Its also known as (e)ditable (t)ext (c)onfigurations.

This obviously took some time and I think many people new to any UNIX
like operating system will find this helpful and enjoyable. Great post!

### Ahh...

douchebag (not verified) - February 8, 2010 @ 7:33pm

As a intermediate Linux user to program embedded devices....i like it!
given there isn't much that i like in this world, hence my screen name.
Thanks for doing it.

### Thanks

Baron (not verified) - April 9, 2010 @ 5:04pm

Thanks for the story! It\`s great!

### Great effort on explaining

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - May 4, 2010 @ 10:31pm

Great effort on explaining to a newbie like me...made it understandable
and interesting at the same time. Once again terrific story and I now
feel I know so much more I might get myself into trouble lol.

### good attempt

chilaka (not verified) - August 3, 2010 @ 8:52am

good attempt

### Superb Article

Kunal Samdarshi (not verified) - October 1, 2010 @ 11:33am

I liked it very much and so will any Linux user :)\
 Good job...keep the good work going.

### many thanks

Thanasis (not verified) - October 23, 2010 @ 12:03pm

Such simplicity and completeness usually come from deep knowledge.\
 Thanks for the work and for sharing with the community.

### unique and easy to understand

Anonymous Penguin (not verified) - February 4, 2011 @ 6:08am

one of the best for starters as well as intermediates

### beginner linux user here.

Anonymous Penguin number 0990909 (not verified) - January 10, 2012 @
11:17pm

beginner linux user here. This article helped very much Thank You.

### Awesome

Chakravarthy (not verified) - January 30, 2012 @ 4:55am

This is the best way for newbies to learn file system hierarchy.
Appreciated the effort. Would really enjoy same kind of documents for
other section of Linux.

### Wonderful

Kyle 4 Li (not verified) - March 19, 2012 @ 6:47am

Clear description of Linux File System.

### Great work

Anonymous Penguin 2 (not verified) - March 23, 2012 @ 7:44pm

funny and to the point.

### Excellent

Newbie\_user (not verified) - June 19, 2012 @ 3:18pm

One of the fantastic article I've ever seen in my lifetime.\
 Your explanation is superb.. Keep up the good work..\
 Hal, Thanks to you.. otherwise we all have to enter the cave. You
helped us a lot! :)

### Great article

Stu Robi (not verified) - October 4, 2012 @ 6:12pm

Coming up to speed on Linux and this was very informative. Humor was
really good to keep my interest as well as help me to remember some of
the points.

Would love to see more and instructional articles in this style.

Comment viewing options
-----------------------

Flat list - collapsedFlat list - expandedThreaded list -
collapsedThreaded list - expanded

Date - newest firstDate - oldest first

10 comments per page30 comments per page50 comments per page70 comments
per page90 comments per page150 comments per page200 comments per
page250 comments per page300 comments per page

Select your preferred way to display the comments and click "Save
settings" to activate your changes.

Post new comment
----------------

Your name: \*

Title:

Comment: \*

CAPTCHA

**We can't accept links** (unless you obfuscate them). You also need to
negotiate the following CAPTCHA...

\

Username: Password:

[Create Account](/user/register) | [About TuxRadar](/about)

-   [](http://www.futureplc.com/)

[Top ▲](javascript:window.scrollTo(0,0);)

-   Future is AOP & PPA Digital Publisher of the Year and BMA Media
    Company of the Year.
-   This site is part of Future plc, an international media group and
    leading digital publisher. We produce content across five core
    areas:

-   ###### Technology

    -   [TechRadar](http://www.techradar.com/ "Tech news")
    -   [T3](http://www.t3.com/ "Technology news and gadget reviews")
    -   [Mac|Life](http://www.maclife.com/ "iPhone, iPad, Mac")
    -   [Gizmodo
        UK](http://www.gizmodo.co.uk/ "Tech news, from off the beaten track")
    -   [More...](http://www.futureplc.com/what-we-do/portfolios/technology/ "More...")

-   ###### Entertainment

    -   [CVG](http://www.computerandvideogames.com/ "Game news and reviews")
    -   [PC Gamer](http://www.pcgamer.com/ "PC games")
    -   [GamesRadar](http://www.gamesradar.com/ "Game cheats and news")
    -   [Total Film](http://www.totalfilm.com/ "Movie news")
    -   [More...](http://www.futureplc.com/what-we-do/portfolios/entertainment/ "More...")

-   ###### Music

    -   [MusicRadar](http://www.musicradar.com/ "Music news")
    -   [Guitarist](http://www.musicradar.com/guitarist "The guitar player's bible")
    -   [FutureMusic](http://www.musicradar.com/futuremusic "Technique and technology for making music")
    -   [Rhythm](http://www.musicradar.com/rhythm "The UK's best-selling drum magazine")
    -   [More...](http://www.futureplc.com/what-we-do/portfolios/music/ "More...")

-   ###### Creative

    -   [Digital Camera
        World](http://www.digitalcameraworld.com/ "Digital Camera News, Reviews, Tips and Techniques")
    -   [Mollie
        Makes](http://www.molliemakes.com/ "Making, collecting, thrifting, crafting")
    -   [Photography
        Week](http://photographyweek.digitalcameraworld.com/ "The weekly iPad magazine for photographers")
    -   [The Simple
        Things](http://www.thesimplethings.com/ "Celebrating the things that matter most")
    -   [More...](http://www.futureplc.com/what-we-do/portfolios/creative/ "More...")

-   ###### Sport & Auto

    -   [BikeRadar](http://www.bikeradar.com/ "Bikes and bike reviews")
    -   [Cyclingnews](http://www.cyclingnews.com/ "Pro cycling news and reviews")
    -   [Football
        Week](http://www.thefootballweek.net/ "Get ahead of the game")
    -   [TriRadar](http://www.triradar.com/ "Triathlon Training, News & Gear")
    -   [More...](http://www.futureplc.com/what-we-do/portfolios/sport-and-auto/ "More...")

-   [About Future](http://www.futureplc.com/about/ "About Future")
-   [Jobs](http://www.yourfuturejob.com/ "Jobs in media")
-   [PR](http://www.futureplc.com/news/ "Public Relations")
-   [Advertising](http://www.futureplc.com/what-we-do/advertising-solutions/ "Advertising")
-   [Digital
    Future](http://advertising.digitalfuture.com/ "Digital Future")
-   [Privacy
    Policy](http://www.futureplc.com/privacy-policy/ "Privacy Policy")
-   [Cookies
    Policy](http://www.futureplc.com/cookies-policy/ "Cookies Policy")
-   [Terms &
    Conditions](http://www.futureplc.com/terms-and-conditions/ "Terms and Conditions")
-   [Subscriptions](http://www.myfavouritemagazines.co.uk/ "Buy magazines online")
-   [Investor
    Relations](http://www.futureplc.com/investors/ "Investor Relations")
-   [Contact Future](http://www.futureplc.com/contact/ "Contact Future")

© Future Publishing Limited, Beauford Court, 30 Monmouth Street, Bath
BA1 2BW. All rights reserved. England and Wales company registration
number 2008885.

\

![image](http://uk.sitestat.com/future/tuxradar/s?ros.content.take-linux-filesystem-tour..page)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://tuxradar.com/content/take-linux-filesystem-tour/
