[![Infobyte Security
Research](http://www.infobytesec.com/images/logo-infobyte.png)](/)

[MENU](#)

Infobyte Security Research is dedicated to research, analysis topics
like security, cryptography, forensic, electronics development, reverse
engineering, science in general. Organizer of ekoparty security
conference www.ekoparty.org

Bypassing WAFs with non-alphanumeric XSS.
=========================================

[Matías A. Ré
Medina](http://www.blogger.com/profile/16501107927784071181 "author profile")
[6:57
PM](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012/09/bypassing-wafs-with-non-alphanumeric-xss.html "permanent link")
[cross site
scripting](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/cross%20site%20scripting?max-results=4)
[english](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/english?max-results=4)
[hieroglyphy](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/hieroglyphy?max-results=4)
[non-alphanumeric](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/non-alphanumeric?max-results=4)
[pyronbee](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/pyronbee?max-results=4)
[research](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/research?max-results=4)
[waf
bypassing](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/waf%20bypassing?max-results=4)
[xss](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/xss?max-results=4)
[![image](http://www.infobytesec.com/blog/img/icon18_edit_allbkg.gif)](http://www.blogger.com/post-edit.g?blogID=4732773078881491596&postID=7773636851385721625&from=pencil "Edit Post")

This post is an attempt to expand what we already discussed on
[Patricio’s blog](http://patriciopalladino.com/blog/), but with a focus
on security in web applications. Although this post will not be a
shocker, I will try to make it as interesting and entertaining as
possible. If you have not read what Patricio and I wrote on [his
blog](http://patriciopalladino.com/blog/2012/08/09/non-alphanumeric-javascript.html)
you should go there before continuing, otherwise you may not understand
properly some of the references I will be making.\

#### Cross site scripting attacks

As some of you may know, the common security method to prevent XSS is by
escaping attacker controlled input (which ultimately becomes webserver
output, assuming a persistent web form attack for example), so having a
template engine doing this automatically is the best practice.
Unfortunately not everybody follows this recommendation, and when
manually escaping, people are really prone to making mistakes. So, to
overcome this, Web Application Firewalls (WAFs) and Intrusion
Detection/Prevention Systems (IDS/IPS) do their part mitigating what has
been left behind.\
 \
 So from an attacker’s point of view we have three stages to bypass,
user input sanitization (due to manual escaping mistakes), WAF filtering
(by rules such as those provided by modsecurity), and browser
protections (which are not covered in this article).\

#### Bypassing WAF filters

Basically, the purpose of a network-based application layer firewall is
to monitor and block user content which violates pre-defined policies.
In our case, these polices are patterns of user input which can
potentially end up in an attack.\
 \
 The main idea of bypassing a WAF is to craft requests semantically
equivalent to a XSS attack for example, while avoiding the security
policies.\
 \
 For XSS, you usually make use of JavaScript’s common methods to steal
user information, such as: `eval()`, `Function()`, `document.write()`,
`document.cookie()`, `alert()`, etc. The problem is, the majority of the
WAFs will filter the request immediately if one of these methods are
found in a request. Also, if you know the target’s browser, with the
help of its API you can use non-standarized methods to extend the
attack, which can lead to an easier bypass since most of non-standarized
methods are not taken into account by most policies.\
 \
 But applying what we have learnt about encoders like
[hieroglyhphy](https://github.com/mattaereal/hieroglyphy.py) (my python
port), [jsfuck](http://jsfuck.com/), and others, we can obfuscate our
attack and payload properly. The downside would be that the encoding
will increase considerably the amount of characters used on the original
request (a friend’s research has shown inflation rates of between 600
and 1000 times, with 650-850 being typical when obfuscating an entire
script, such as for exploitation), but we don’t really need to fully
encode it, we can just encode parts of it, like half of a method’s name
or sensitive parts for exploitation.\
 \
 Here’s a simple example that you can test in your browser’s interactive
console:\

    eval("aler"+(!![]+[])[+[]])("xss")

If you have not had any luck yet don’t get sad, there are still other
ways to try to trick the security measures. Since JavaScript has two
different syntactic forms to access properties, you can access an Object
method like a dictionary:
`object.method(arguments) === object["method"](arguments)`\
 `` An example with `document.cookie()` would be: `document["cookie"]`,
where `cookie` is passed as a string which you can obfuscate like this:\

    document[({}+[])[!+[]+!![]+!![]+!![]+!![]]+({}+[])...]

I didn’t include the entire obfuscated representation as it is very long
(2727 characters to be exact).\
 \
 There are also alternate ways of accessing them too, in case the
`document` word is also filtered. Since `this` is a reference to the
current `window` you can use it as a “dictionary” too:
`this["document"]["cookie"]`\
 `` Same thing with the rest, like `alert()`:\

    this["alert"]("xss")
    window["alert"]("xss")

Combining them you can get different results, also applying hex encoding
is useful, some WAFs get bypassed just with that.\
 \

    window[(+{}+[])[+!![]]+(![]+[])[!+[]+!![]]+([][+[]]+[])[!+[]+!![]+!![]]+(!![]+[])[+!![]]+(!![]+[])[+[]]]

    this['ale'+(!![]+[])[-~[]]+(!![]+[])[+[]]]()

    this['\x64\x6f\x63\x75\x6d'+([][+[]]+[])[!+[]+!![]+!![]]+([][+[]]+[])[+!![]]+(!![]+[])[+[]]][({}+[])[!+[]+!![]+!![]+!![]+!![]]+({}+[])[+!![]]+({}+[])[+!![]]+'kie']

    document['\x63\x6f\x6f\x6b\x69\x65']

[Here you can find more
examples.](http://pastie.org/private/nkryfy49l1oy8hvblh90q)\

#### Playground

If you already feel like playing a little with this, I made a playground
for the anxious people that want to apply what have learnt above. It’s a
little script with different kind of vulnerabilities with a basic
simulation of a simple WAF ruleset. The goal is to retrieve the cookies
from anybody who visits the site, bypassing the security measures with
the above. Consider doing it manually.\
 \
 Click here to go to the
[playground](http://www.mfsec.com.ar/playground.php).\

#### Pyronbee

> “We should accept WAFs for what they really are: a method of
> increasing the cost of attacks, but not necessarily one that might
> repel every attacker.”

Sometimes you find yourself doing a pentest and the security (WAF, IDS,
IPS) starts to block certain requests you perform, for example the ones
for an SQL injection. Knowing that a WAF does not see the same as a web
server, tweaking our request a little can cause the security mechanisms
to ignore it, but the webserver may understand it as a successful
request.\
 \
 One thing that you always must keep in mind is impedance mismatch:
*“you’re interpreting the stream of data in one way, but there’s a
danger that whatever you are protecting is interpreting the same data
differently”.* Web servers tend to fix malformed requests, and there are
modules to correct some urls to specific documents and paths, such as
`mod_spelling`. So you can try to send “broken” requests hoping that the
WAF will consider it harmless and the web server interpret it
correctly.\
 \
 So to accelerate the process, I’ve made
[`pyronbee`](https://github.com/mattaereal/pyronbee), a tool based on a
project titled `waf-research` (IronBee) on github by Ivan Ristic,
creator of ModSecurity, in which you can automate and make custom
requests to a certain host to check which formatted requests get
filtered and which ones get past the WAF.\
 (I’m currently making a script to port the test files made for IronBee
to JSON syntax in order to use it with mine.)\

> “In fact, bypassing network-centric security tools is bound to be
> easier because in general, they perform less HTTP processing (parsing)
> than web application firewalls.”

In this case, we would use pyronbee to see which `.test` files are not
filtered by security rulesets, using encoded requests for pyronbee with
tools like hieroglyphy.\
 Despite we are trying to bypass a WAF, we are not really doing it in a
low-level protocol, since the idea of doing so is to replicate the
bypass on foreign browsers as a CSRF/XSS attack. If you want to go any
further with this, you can format pyronbee requests to fulfill your
needs at that level, but that would be another whole story.\
 \
 As for the playground, pyronbee won’t be of any help because it’s a php
script simulating a WAF with just a str\_replace. However yon can host
it on your site and play a little with it. Here’s the [playground source
code](http://pastie.org/private/wkoayl2kxtnrdvkuoava), and maybe you
might want to use the test/playground/ folder `.test` files for that.\
 \
 On pyronbee’s main folder you will find another folder named ‘extra’
where you have a script which can craft standarized HTTP/1.1 GET
requests from a list of your own, choosing a desired prefix, in
pyronbee’s .test file format.\

#### Side notes and aknowledgments

Just to clarify, hieroglyphy was just an example, there are multiple
ways of doing encodings, with more or less characters, but you always
have the trade-of between encoding size and charset length. And remember
to use url encoding when needed on pyronbee **.test** files, because for
example for the `+ `, the webserver interprets it as a space, and you
will generating false positives.\
 \
 I’d like to thank **kernelsmith**, an user I met on IRC that was
porting hieroglhyphy to ruby with the idea to include it on metasploit
as an obfuscator. In the meanwhile we realized that older versions of IE
(< 9) and JS in IE9 on ‘quirksmode’ do not support some stuff, like
accessing a string as an array, unless the site is using a standarized
DOCTYPE. Take this as a side note in case you want to develop obfuscated
exploits to bypass AVs. Besides from that, he was really supportive and
enthusiastic all the time.\
 \
 Finally, I will also like to thank **snf**, a friend, who was very
supportive to my ideas during the development of pyronbee.\
 \
 The quotes I’ve made are from the following paper: [Protocol-Level
Evasion of Web Application
Firewalls](https://community.qualys.com/servlet/JiveServlet/download/38-10665/Protocol-Level%20Evasion%20of%20Web%20Application%20Firewalls%20v1.1%20(18%20July%202012).pdf).

Share :

[Tweet](http://twitter.com/share "Share via Twitter")

[✚](http://www.addtoany.com/share_save "More Share")

[](http://www.printfriendly.com "Printer Friendly and PDF")

#### Related Post

Next \
 [« Prev
Post](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012/10/review-ekoparty-security-conference-2012.html "Newer Post")

Previous \
 [Next Post
»](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012/07/national-program-about-critical_19.html "Older Post")

[Post a
Comment](http://www.blogger.com/comment.g?blogID=4732773078881491596&postID=7773636851385721625 "Post a Comment")

Thanks for your comment

Subscribe to: [Post Comments ( Atom
)](http://blog.infobytesec.com/feeds/7773636851385721625/comments/default)

-   [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/Infobytesec)
-   [twitter](http://www.twitter.com/infobytesec)
-   [googleplus](#)
-   [linkedin](http://www.linkedin.com/company/244720)
-   [youtube](http://www.youtube.com/user/isrlab)

Popular
-------

-   [![Perverting Embedded Devices - ZKSoftware Fingerprint Reader (Part
    I)](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-Ncc-dtdjd3Y/U8HcUJ-Gz3I/AAAAAAAAHs4/PVXtv8ri3tg/s72-c/IN01A.jpg "Perverting Embedded Devices - ZKSoftware Fingerprint Reader (Part I)")](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014/07/perverting-embedded-devices-zksoftware_2920.html)
    [Perverting Embedded Devices - ZKSoftware Fingerprint Reader (Part
    I)](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014/07/perverting-embedded-devices-zksoftware_2920.html "Perverting Embedded Devices - ZKSoftware Fingerprint Reader (Part I)")
    As you may have noticed from other blog posts, we like to play
    around with basically any device we can get our hands on.
    Incidentally, this ...
-   [![Faraday new features: (Notifications, Workspace split,
    Performance,
    Api)](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-H7R8RZJ_7Y0/U5IxvGK37gI/AAAAAAAAAB8/dhhYA84IrL0/s72-c/faraday_notifications.png "Faraday new features: (Notifications, Workspace split, Performance, Api)")](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014/06/dear-faraday-followers-we-know-you-are.html)
    [Faraday new features: (Notifications, Workspace split, Performance,
    Api)](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014/06/dear-faraday-followers-we-know-you-are.html "Faraday new features: (Notifications, Workspace split, Performance, Api)")
    Dear Faraday followers, we know have been waiting your monthly
    update, but you must know how defying is to develop in potentially
    shippable ...
-   [![Go Deep Pro (1 de
    2)](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-ZsT2d5-S2uw/UfrQ2-ukbaI/AAAAAAAAAHI/RS3qweWyP8k/s72-c/05_h3_black_camera_glam.jpg "Go Deep Pro (1 de 2)")](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2013/08/go-deep-pro-1-de-2.html)
    [Go Deep Pro (1 de
    2)](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2013/08/go-deep-pro-1-de-2.html "Go Deep Pro (1 de 2)")
    GO Deep Pro Analizando el WIFI de la GoPro En esta pequeña entrada
    analizaremos el trafico de portátil, diminuta pero potente GoPro
    H...
-   [Nuevo workshop en ISSA Argentina - Pentesting
    Colaborativo](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014/08/nuevo-workshop-en-issa-argentina.html "Nuevo workshop en ISSA Argentina - Pentesting Colaborativo")
    ¿Estás en Buenos Aires el día 15 de Agosto? Te invitamos a
    participar de un workshop sobre las distintas fases y tareas a la
    hora de encar...
-   [Bypassing WAFs with non-alphanumeric
    XSS.](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012/09/bypassing-wafs-with-non-alphanumeric-xss.html "Bypassing WAFs with non-alphanumeric XSS.")
    This post is an attempt to expand what we already discussed on
    Patricio’s blog , but with a focus on security in web applications.
    Althoug...

Archive
-------

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2014](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2014-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2015-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=7)
    ( 7 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014_08_01_archive.html) (
        1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014_07_01_archive.html) ( 1
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014_06_01_archive.html) ( 1
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014_05_01_archive.html) ( 2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2014_04_01_archive.html) ( 2
        )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2013](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2013-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2014-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=8)
    ( 8 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2013_12_01_archive.html)
        ( 2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2013_08_01_archive.html) (
        3 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2013_05_01_archive.html) ( 3 )

-   [▼](javascript:void(0))
    [2012](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2012-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2013-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=5)
    ( 5 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012_10_01_archive.html) (
        1 )

    -   [▼](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012_09_01_archive.html)
        ( 1 )
        -   [Bypassing WAFs with non-alphanumeric
            XSS.](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012/09/bypassing-wafs-with-non-alphanumeric-xss.html)

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012_07_01_archive.html) ( 2
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012_01_01_archive.html) (
        1 )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2011](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2011-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2012-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=13)
    ( 13 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2011_12_01_archive.html)
        ( 3 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2011_10_01_archive.html) (
        3 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2011_09_01_archive.html)
        ( 2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2011_08_01_archive.html) (
        1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2011_07_01_archive.html) ( 3
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2011_03_01_archive.html) ( 1
        )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2010](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2010-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2011-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=18)
    ( 18 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_12_01_archive.html)
        ( 1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_11_01_archive.html)
        ( 3 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [October](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_10_01_archive.html) (
        1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_09_01_archive.html)
        ( 2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_08_01_archive.html) (
        1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_07_01_archive.html) ( 5
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_05_01_archive.html) ( 4 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2010_03_01_archive.html) ( 1
        )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2009](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2009-01-01T00:00:00-02:00&updated-max=2010-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=7)
    ( 7 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2009_09_01_archive.html)
        ( 2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2009_06_01_archive.html) ( 2
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2009_04_01_archive.html) ( 2
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [January](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2009_01_01_archive.html) (
        1 )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2008](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2008-01-01T00:00:00-02:00&updated-max=2009-01-01T00:00:00-02:00&max-results=20)
    ( 20 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_12_01_archive.html)
        ( 3 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [November](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_11_01_archive.html)
        ( 2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_09_01_archive.html)
        ( 1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_08_01_archive.html) (
        2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_07_01_archive.html) ( 3
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_06_01_archive.html) ( 2
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_05_01_archive.html) ( 2 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_04_01_archive.html) ( 3
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2008_03_01_archive.html) ( 2
        )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2007](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2007-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2008-01-01T00:00:00-02:00&max-results=4)
    ( 4 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [December](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2007_12_01_archive.html)
        ( 1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [September](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2007_09_01_archive.html)
        ( 1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2007_06_01_archive.html) ( 1
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2007_02_01_archive.html)
        ( 1 )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2006](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2006-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2007-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=5)
    ( 5 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [August](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2006_08_01_archive.html) (
        3 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [February](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2006_02_01_archive.html)
        ( 2 )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2005](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2005-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2006-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=11)
    ( 11 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [July](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2005_07_01_archive.html) ( 3
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [May](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2005_05_01_archive.html) ( 1 )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [April](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2005_04_01_archive.html) ( 3
        )

    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [March](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2005_03_01_archive.html) ( 4
        )

-   [►](javascript:void(0))
    [2002](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search?updated-min=2002-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&updated-max=2003-01-01T00:00:00-03:00&max-results=1)
    ( 1 )
    -   [►](javascript:void(0))
        [June](http://blog.infobytesec.com/2002_06_01_archive.html) ( 1
        )

Other Lenguages
---------------

[English](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/english)
[Portuguese](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/portuguese)
[Spanish](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/spanish)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=4732773078881491596&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML2&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

Powered by [Blogger](http://www.blogger.com).

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=4732773078881491596&widgetType=Attribution&widgetId=Attribution1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

Twitter
-------

[Tweets by @infobytesec](https://twitter.com/infobytesec)

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=4732773078881491596&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML3&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar "Edit")

Label
-----

[spanish](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/spanish)
[english](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/english)
[advisory](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/advisory)
[evilgrade](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/evilgrade)
[research](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/research)
[ekoparty](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/ekoparty)
[pentest](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/pentest)
[tools](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/tools)
[development](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/development)
[conference](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/conference)
[conferencia](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/conferencia)
[faraday](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/faraday)
[news](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/news)
[update](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/update)
[release](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/release)
[security](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/security)
[embedded](http://blog.infobytesec.com/search/label/embedded)

Contact us
----------

\
**Infobyte LLC**\
\
HQ +1 305 851 3373\
2699 S. Bayshore Dr \#300.\
Miami, FL

[![image](http://img1.blogblog.com/img/icon18_wrench_allbkg.png)](//www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=4732773078881491596&widgetType=Text&widgetId=Text1&action=editWidget&sectionId=footer2 "Edit")

We recommend
------------

[ekoparty security conference](http://www.ekoparty.org/)\
\
[Faraday Pen Test Enviroment](http://www.faradaysec.com/)

Copyright © 2014 [Infobyte Security Research
Labs](http://blog.infobytesec.com/) All Right Reserved

Design by [Kiki Dee](http://aisukablog.blogspot.com/) Powered by
[Blogger](http://www.blogger.com/ "Blogger")

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.infobytesec.com/2012/09/bypassing-wafs-with-non-alphanumeric-xss.html
