[Me](/)
=======

The simple thoughts of Jonathan J Hunt.
---------------------------------------

-   [RSS](/atom.xml "subscribe via RSS")

-   [About](/)
-   [Blog](/blog/)
-   [Archives](/blog/archives)

Btrees Are the New Black
========================

Apr 1st, 2014 | [Comments](#disqus_thread)

Self-balancing trees are an important class of data structures. In most
textbooks, red/black binary trees are introduced first, and then btrees
come later, usually mentioned as a data structure used in file systems.
Both data structures have asymptotically identical performance ($O(\\log
n)$ time for insertion, lookup and deletion). Here, I will show why,
despite your textbook’s ordering, btrees may often be a better choice.

Btrees (or variants) are often used in file systems because they make
better use of devices which read and write blocks of data (such as hard
drives or flash). They do this by trading some extra space and
computation for increased data locality. Each node in a btree stores
between $t$ and $2t – 1$ keys (except for the root node, which might
contain less entries). Search may require examining each key in the
nodes on the search path and any change to a node may require shifting
all of the entries to maintain the sort. However, you will notice that
all of these opererations are data local.

What else is block-like these days? Modern (misleadingly named) random
access memory. Modern CPUs have multiple layers of caching to improve
the performance dealing with the (relatively) slow main memory. My Intel
Core 2 Duo has a 64 byte cache line size, meaning that requesting the
contents of a (correctly aligned) memory address makes examining the
contents of memory address within 64 bytes much cheaper (a full cache
miss costs [\~165
cycles](http://software.intel.com/sites/products/collateral/hpc/vtune/cycle_accounting_analysis.pdf)).
Another advantage is that btrees result in less calls to the memory
allocator since each node stores more entries.

The full description of
[red/black](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red%E2%80%93black_tree) trees
and [btrees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B-tree) is outside the scope
of this article. For our purposes we just need a brief description of
what the two tree types look like.

A red-black tree is a balanced binary tree. Each node in the tree stores
one key to value mapping and points to the left (nodes with a key that
is smaller than the current node) and right (nodes that are larger than
the current node). As you can see, looking up an item in the tree
involves branching at each node to the left or right until termination.

![image](/images/btrees-are-the-new-black/red-black-tree.svg "Example red-black tree")

A btree, on the other hand, allows more entries per node (as above,
between $t$ and $2t-1$ where $t$ is a parameter of the btree). Each
non-leaf node has up to $2t$ children, each child tree containing the
nodes intermediate in value between the constituent entries. Searching
in a btree requires examining, on average, half of the entries in a node
to determine which child to descend into. On the other hand, the depth
of the tree is decreased since, even in the worst case, each node has at
least $t$ entries (excluding the root node).

![image](/images/btrees-are-the-new-black/btree.svg)

For many, binary trees are the standard choice for a tree data
structure. With modern architectures this might not be the most
efficient choice. Here, we examine the speed of inserting and then
retrieving 10^7^ elements. The mapping we are considering is from
randomly chosen integers to void pointers.

Unlike binary trees, btrees have a tunable parameter $t$, which
specifies the number of elements stored in each node. So first we
examine the best choice of the $t$ parameter.

![image](/images/btrees-are-the-new-black/btree_parameter_optimization.svg "Btree parameter choice")

The graph shows the user CPU time for different choices of $t$. As you
can see, the optimal choice of $t$ is far-away from a binary tree. The
minimum runtime was at $t = 24$ (give or take some noise, but that’s
close enough for our purposes). This means nodes store between $24$ to
$47$ keys.

We then compared a btree with $t = 24$ against two other commonly chosen
data structures. A dynamically sized hash map and a red-black tree. In
all cases, I used a straightforward C implmentation and compiled with
standard optimizations for benchmarking.

![image](/images/btrees-are-the-new-black/data_structure_shootout.svg "data structure shootout")

Unsuprisingly, a hash map performs far and above the rest. This is to be
expected, mapping is exactly what hash maps are for and, in most
situations, they should perform insertions and lookups with amortized
$O(1)$ time complexity. However, for situations where you wish to
preserve order, or avoid any insertion ever taking more than $O(\\log
n)$, a tree may be a better choice. For those situations you can see
that a well-tuned btree was outperforming a red/black tree by more than
2 times.

As memory architectures begin to behave more like block devices than
random access memory, it is worth revisiting algorithm choices that were
made when memory was uniform. As a bonus I found a btree easier to
reason about and implement (the number of lines needed to implement both
a btree and red/black was very similar though).

All of the code for the algorithms are [available on
github](https://github.com/jjh42/algo).

#### Updates

-   Fixed typos. Thanks to a helpful readers for pointing them out.

-   Clarified wording and the amortized analysis in the paragraph on
    hash trees.

-   [Discussion on hacker
    news](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7513896). I learned that
    Google provides a [STL-like implementation of
    btrees](https://code.google.com/p/cpp-btree/) for similar reasons to
    those discussed here.

-   Corrected the date of the blog post.

Posted by Jonathan J Hunt Apr 1st, 2014 [algo](/blog/categories/algo/)

[Tweet](http://twitter.com/share)

[« Atoms/Symbols in
Python](/blog/atoms-slash-symbols-in-python/ "Previous Post: Atoms/Symbols in Python")

Comments
========

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

Recent Posts
============

-   [Btrees Are the New Black](/blog/btrees-are-the-new-black/)
-   [Atoms/Symbols in Python](/blog/atoms-slash-symbols-in-python/)
-   [You Look Ridiculous](/blog/you-look-ridiculous/)

[![image](http://www.google.com/images/icons/ui/gprofile_button-32.png) Google+](https://plus.google.com/116992799662130804450?rel=author)
==========================================================================================================================================

GitHub Repos
============

-   Status updating...

[@jjh42](https://github.com/jjh42) on GitHub

Copyright © 2014 - Jonathan J Hunt - Powered by
[Octopress](http://octopress.org)

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.me.net.nz/blog/btrees-are-the-new-black/
