[The Little Calculist](/)
=========================

A little lambda goes a long way...
----------------------------------

[Blog](/index.html)

-   [Tags ****](#)
    -   [All Posts](/index.html)
    -   [announcements](/tags/announcements.html)
    -   [arrays](/tags/arrays.html)
    -   [asm.js](/tags/asm-js.html)
    -   [AST](/tags/AST.html)
    -   [async](/tags/async.html)
    -   [binary data](/tags/binary-data.html)
    -   [continuations](/tags/continuations.html)
    -   [coroutines](/tags/coroutines.html)
    -   [duck testing](/tags/duck-testing.html)
    -   [duck types](/tags/duck-types.html)
    -   [endianness](/tags/endianness.html)
    -   [ES6](/tags/ES6.html)
    -   [Esprima](/tags/Esprima.html)
    -   [evolution](/tags/evolution.html)
    -   [generators](/tags/generators.html)
    -   [homoiconicity](/tags/homoiconicity.html)
    -   [JavaScript](/tags/JavaScript.html)
    -   [macros](/tags/macros.html)
    -   [modules](/tags/modules.html)
    -   [mozilla](/tags/mozilla.html)
    -   [nominal types](/tags/nominal-types.html)
    -   [Octopress](/tags/Octopress.html)
    -   [Parser API](/tags/Parser-API.html)
    -   [S-expressions](/tags/S-expressions.html)
    -   [structural types](/tags/structural-types.html)
    -   [TAG](/tags/TAG.html)
    -   [TC39](/tags/TC39.html)
    -   [typed arrays](/tags/typed-arrays.html)
    -   [W3C](/tags/W3C.html)
    -   [wiki](/tags/wiki.html)

-   [About](/about.html)
-   [Atom](/feeds/all.atom.xml)
-   [RSS](/feeds/all.rss.xml)

Homoiconicity isn’t the point
=============================

Apr 17th, 2012

I’ve never really understood what “homoiconic” is supposed to mean.
People often say something like “the syntax uses one of the language’s
basic data structures.” That’s a category error: syntax is not a data
structure, it’s just a representation of data as text. Or you hear “[the
syntax of the language is the same as the syntax of its data
structures](http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2012/04/15/syntax-matters-dot-dot-dot/).”
But S-expressions don’t “belong” to Lisp; there’s no reason why Perl or
Haskell or JavaScript couldn’t have S-expression libraries. And every
parser generates a data structure, so if you have a [Python parser in
Python](http://docs.python.org/library/parser.html), then is Python
homoiconic? Is [JavaScript](http://esprima.org/)?

Maybe there’s a more precise way to define homoiconicity, but frankly I
think it misses the point. What makes Lisp’s syntax powerful is not the
fact that it can be represented as a data structure, it’s that **it’s
possible to *read* it without </em\>parsing</em\>**.

Wait, what?

It’s hard to explain these concepts with traditional terminology,
because the distinction between reading and parsing simply doesn’t exist
for languages without macros.

### Parsing vs reading: the compiler’s view

In almost every non-Lispy language ever, the front end of every
interpreter and compiler looks pretty much the same:

![traditional parsing pipeline](/img/parse-pipeline.png)

traditional parsing pipeline

Take the text, run it through a parser, and you get out an AST. But
that’s not how it works when you have macros. You simply can’t produce
an AST without expanding macros first. So the front-end of a Lispy
language usually looks more like:

![macro pipeline](/img/macro-pipeline.png)

macro pipeline

What’s this intermediate syntax tree? It’s an almost entirely
superficial understanding of your program: it basically does
paren-matching to create a tree representing the surface nesting
structure of the text. This is nowhere near an AST, but it’s just enough
for the macro expansion system to do its job.

### Parsing vs reading: the macro expander’s view

If you see this statement in the middle of a JavaScript program:

    1
    2
    3

    for (let key in obj) {
        print(key);
    }

you know for sure that it’s a *ForInStatement*, as defined by the spec
(I’m using `let` because… ES6, that’s why). If you know the grammar of
JavaScript, you know the entire structure of the statement. But in
Scheme, we could implement `for` as a macro. When the macro expander
encounters:

    1
    2

    (for (key obj)
      (print key))

it knows nothing about the contents of the expression. All it knows is
the macro definition of `for`. But that’s all it needs to know! The
expander just takes the two subtrees, `(key obj)` and `(print key)`, and
passes them as arguments to the `for` macro.

### Parsing vs reading: the macro’s view

Here’s a simple `for` macro, written in
[Racket](http://docs.racket-lang.org/guide/pattern-macros.html#%28part._define-syntax-rule%29):

    1
    2

    (define-syntax-rule (for (x e1) e2)
      (for-each (λ (x) e2) e1))

This macro works by [pattern
matching](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_matching): it expects two
sub-trees, the first of which can itself be broken down into two
identifier nodes `x` and `e1`, and it expands into the `for-each`
expression. So when the expander calls the macro with the above example,
the result of expansion is:

    1

    (for-each (λ (key) (print key)) obj)

### The power of the parenthesis

If you’ve ever wondered why Lisp weirdos are so inexplicably attached to
their parentheses, this is what it’s all about. Parentheses make it
unambiguous for the expander to understand what the arguments to a macro
are, because **it’s always clear where the arguments begin and end**. It
knows this without needing to understand anything about what the macro
definition is going to do. Imagine trying to define a macro expander for
a language with syntax like JavaScript’s. What should the expander do
when it sees:

    1

    quux (mumble, flarg) [1, 2, 3] { foo: 3 } grunch /wibble/i

How many arguments does `quux` take? Is the curly-braced argument a
block statement or an object literal? Is the thing at the end an
arithmetic expression or a regular expression literal? These are all
questions that can’t be answered in JavaScript without knowing your
parsing context — and macros obscure the parsing context.

None of this is to say that it’s *impossible* to design a macro system
for languages with non-Lispy syntax. My point is just that the power of
Lisp’s (Scheme’s, Racket’s, Clojure’s, …) macros comes not from being
somehow tied to a central data structure of the language, but rather to
the expander’s ability to break up a macro call into its separate
arguments and then let the macro do all the work of parsing those
arguments. In other words, **homoiconicity isn’t the point, `read` is**.

Posted by Dave Herman &bullet; Apr 17th, 2012 &bullet;
[macros](/tags/macros.html), [S-expressions](/tags/S-expressions.html),
[homoiconicity](/tags/homoiconicity.html)

* * * * *

["Tweet"](https://twitter.com/share)

-   [← *The little-endian
    web?*](/blog/2012/04/24/the-little-endian-web/)
-   [*Synchronous module loading in ES6*
    →](/blog/2012/03/29/synchronous-module-loading-in-es6/)

* * * * *

Site generated by [Frog](https://github.com/greghendershott/frog), which
was written in [Racket](http://racket-lang.org). Copyright © 2011 - 2014
by David Herman.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://calculist.org/blog/2012/04/17/homoiconicity-isnt-the-point/
