[Skip to main content](#main-content)

[![Cato
Unbound](http://www.cato-unbound.org/sites/cato-unbound.org/files/unbound_journal_logo.png)](/ "Home")

-   [About](/about "About Cato Unbound")
-   [Issues](/issues "All monthly issues of Cato Unbound")
-   [Contact](mailto:jkuznicki@cato.org)

-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/CatoUnbound)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/CatoUnbound)
-   [RSS](/rss)

Search form
-----------

Search

You are here
------------

[Home](/) » [The Basic Income and the Welfare
State](/issues/august-2014/basic-income-welfare-state)

[](/issues/august-2014/basic-income-welfare-state)

The Pragmatic Libertarian Case for a Basic Income Guarantee
===========================================================

[![image](http://www.cato-unbound.org/sites/cato-unbound.org/files/images/authors/avatars/mzwolinski_thumb.jpg)](/contributors/matt-zwolinski)

By

[Matt Zwolinski](/contributors/matt-zwolinski)

Lead Essay

August 4, 2014

-   [Comments](/2014/08/04/matt-zwolinski/pragmatic-libertarian-case-basic-income-guarantee#disqus_thread)

From the perspective of anyone concerned with limiting government and
encouraging individual responsibility, the contemporary American welfare
state is a disaster. According to [a report by the Cato Institute’s
Michael
Tanner](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/PA694.pdf),
welfare programs at the federal level alone cost more than $668 billion
annually, spread across at least 126 different programs. Add another
$284 of welfare spending at the state and local level, and you’ve got
almost $1 trillion dollars of government spending on welfare - over
$20,000 for every poor person in the United States.

Not only does the U.S. welfare state spend a *lot*; it spends it
*badly*. Poor Americans receiving assistance face a bewildering variety
of phase-outs and benefit cliffs that combine to create extremely high
[effective marginal tax rates](http://www.cbo.gov/publication/44621) on
their labor. As a result, poor families often find that working more (or
having a second adult work) [simply doesn’t
pay](http://www.aei-ideas.org/2012/07/julias-mother-why-a-single-mom-is-better-off-on-welfare-than-taking-a-69000-a-year-job/).
And still, despite massive expenditures by the welfare state, some [16%
of Americans are left living in
poverty](http://img.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/files/2013/12/opm.png).

Wouldn’t it be better just to scrap the whole system and write the poor
a check?

In what follows, I will make the case for a Basic Income Guarantee (BIG)
as a replacement for the current welfare state. There are a number of
distinct ways of arguing from libertarian premises to a BIG, some of
which I have
[discussed](http://www.libertarianism.org/columns/libertarian-case-basic-income)
in the
[past](http://www.libertarianism.org/columns/why-did-hayek-support-basic-income).
In this essay, however, I will focus on what I take to be the strongest
and most persuasive libertarian argument. I will argue that a BIG, even
if it is not ideal**from a libertarian perspective, is significantly
better**on libertarian grounds than our current welfare state, and has a
much higher likelihood of being achieved**in a world in which most
people reject libertarian views.

I begin in the next section by explaining what I mean by a BIG. I then
proceed to set out four reasons why libertarians should support a BIG
over the current American welfare state. I close with some reflections
on libertarian ideals and political compromise.

**A Basic Income Guarantee**

For purposes of this essay, I will use the phrase “Basic Income
Guarantee” quite broadly to refer to a wide range of distinct policy
proposals, including Milton Friedman’s [Negative Income
Tax](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xtpgkX588nM) (NIT), Bruce Ackerman
and Anne Alstott’s proposal for a [Stakeholder
Grant](http://yalepress.yale.edu/yupbooks/book.asp?isbn=9780300082609),
the [Thomas
Paine](http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/1082#lf0548-03_head_055) /
[Henry
George](http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/george-progress-and-poverty)
inspired idea of a [citizen’s
dividend](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citizen's_dividend), the [Alaska
Permanent Fund](http://usbig.net/alaskablog/about-the-alaska-dividend/)
Dividend, and Charles Murray’s [2006
proposal](http://www.amazon.com/In-Our-Hands-Replace-Welfare/dp/0844742236)
for the government to write a $10,000 each year to every American
citizen over the age of twenty-one.[[1]](#_ftn1) There is, of course,
quite a bit of variation among these plans in terms of cost, payouts,
implementation, and so on. Despite these differences, however, they all
have in common two important features.

First, they involve a *cash grant*with no strings attached. Unlike other
welfare programs which encourage or require recipients to consume
certain specific kinds of good – such as [medical
care](http://www.medicaid.gov/),
[housing](http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_choice_voucher_program_section_8),
or
[food](http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap)
– a BIG simply gives people cash, and leaves them free to spend it, or
save it, in whatever way they choose.

Second, a BIG is an *unconditional*grant for which every citizen (or at
least every adult citizen) is eligible. It is not means-tested; checks
are issued to poor and rich alike (though on some proposals payments to
the rich will be partially or fully recaptured through the tax system).
Beneficiaries do not have to pass a drug test or demonstrate that they
are willing to work. If you’re alive, and a citizen, you get a check.
Period.

**A Pragmatic Libertarian Argument**

No libertarian would wish for a BIG as an *addition*to the currently
existing welfare state. But what about as a *replacement*for it? Such a
revolutionary overhaul of the welfare state would almost certainly
require a constitutional amendment, both to insulate debate somewhat
from the pleas and protests of special interests, and to make it
considerably more difficult to renege on the deal afterwards. Charles
Murray has given us a rough idea of what such an amendment might look
like:

> Henceforth, federal, state, and local governments shall make no law
> nor establish any program that provides benefits to some citizens but
> not to others. All programs currently providing such benefits are to
> be terminated. The funds formerly allocated to them are to be used
> instead to provide every citizen with a cash grant beginning at age
> twenty-one and continuing until death. The annual value of the cash
> grant at the program’s outset is to be $10,000.

Suppose, to indulge in a bit of speculative fancy, that this deal was
actually on the political table. Should libertarians take it? Given that
it is *not*on the table now, should libertarians make some effort to get
it there? I believe the answer to both of those questions is “yes.” A
BIG might not be libertarians’ *ideal*policy – though more on this later
– but it is almost certainly a lot better on libertarian grounds than
what we have right now. Here are four reasons why.

**Less Bureaucracy**

Every one of the more than 126 federal welfare programs comes with its
own bureaucracy, its own set of arcane rules, regulations, and
restrictions, and its own significant (and
[rising](http://www.dailykos.com/story/2010/09/06/899569/-What-Happened-to-Our-Welfare-Dollars-Bureaucracy-in-the-Era-of-Reform))
overhead costs. A BIG, in contrast, requires significantly less in terms
of administrative expense. A program in which everyone gets a check for
the same amount is simple enough to be administered by a computer
program. And even a more complicated proposal, like Murray’s or like
Friedman’s NIT, could largely piggyback off of the already existing
bureaucracy of the federal tax system.

Eliminating a large chunk of the federal bureaucracy would obviously be
good from the perspective of a libertarian concern to reduce the size
and scope of government. But it would also be good from the perspective
of welfare beneficiaries. Actually getting signed up for all the various
welfare benefits to which one is entitled is tremendously costly in
terms of time, effort, and skill at bureaucratic navigation. Many people
miss out on benefits for which they qualify simply because they don’t
know that the program exists, or what they need to do to draw from it.
Getting the benefit of a BIG, in contrast, requires just a single
signature on the back of a check. If we’re going to spend money on
helping the poor, shouldn’t we make sure that they actually get the help
we’re paying for?

**Cheaper**

Second, a BIG could be considerably *cheaper*than the current welfare
state. How much cheaper depends on the details of the particular
proposal. Some, like
[Murray’s](http://www.amazon.com/In-Our-Hands-Replace-Welfare/dp/0844742236),
which involve a progressive tax on the BIG once a certain threshold of
income is reached, appear to be considerably cheaper. Other analyses,
like [Ed
Dolan’s](http://www.economonitor.com/dolanecon/2014/01/13/could-we-afford-a-universal-basic-income/),
suggest only that a moderate BIG would not cost *more*than what we
currently spend.

Part of the explanation of the relatively low cost of a BIG comes from
the reduction of bureaucracy, described above. But another reason is to
be found in [Director’s
Law](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/724835?uid=2&uid=4&sid=21104200855797):
If you’re like most people, when you hear “welfare” you think about
transfers from the rich to the poor. But in reality, most political
transfers benefit the middle class at the *expense*of the poor (and
rich). If the BIG is going to replace the welfare state, then transfers
to the middle class such as subsidies for higher education, the
[mortgage interest
deduction](http://www.economonitor.com/dolanecon/2011/02/07/the-case-against-the-mortgage-interest-tax-deduction/),
and [tax benefits for retirement
savings](http://www.economonitor.com/dolanecon/2013/01/25/tax-incentives-for-retirement-saving-are-not-working-can-we-find-a-better-way-part-2/)
ought to be cut right along with (if not before) SNAP, TANF, etc.

Again, how much a BIG would cost relative to the current welfare state
depends on the details of the particular BIG proposal. Various proposals
need to be evaluated on their own merits, and of course I do not wish to
claim that *every*BIG proposal will be more affordable than our current
welfare state. But neither is there any reason to believe that
*no*reasonable proposal could be.

**Less Rent-Seeking**

Whenever there exists a bureaucracy with the power and discretion to
take from some in order to benefit others, there will also exist
powerful incentives for individuals to manipulate that bureaucracy in
order to better serve their own private interests. Agents of the
bureaucracy itself will seek to expand its scope and budget regardless
of whether such expansion serves the interests of its clients. And
special interest groups will use various political mechanisms to channel
the organization’s resources into their own pockets.

In theory, the welfare state doles out money and other resources on the
basis of such factors as need and desert. But need and desert are both
philosophically contested and impossible to measure objectively. And so,
in practice, resources are doled out to those who can make the *best
political case* that they need or deserve it. And this is a contest in
which the genuine poor are at a serious disadvantage relative to the
better educated, wealthier, and more politically engaged middle class.

A BIG, in contrast, allows virtually no room for bureaucratic
discretion, and thus minimizes the opportunities for political
rent-seeking and opportunism. It is, as the late [James Buchanan once
noted](http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayFulltext?type=1&fid=3094412&jid=SOY&volumeId=14&issueId=02&aid=3094404),
a perfectly *general*policy that treats all citizens the same. It is
thus entirely ill-suited for use as a method of political exploitation.
We should therefore expect to see much *less*rent-seeking and
opportunism with a BIG than we do with the present welfare state, and
therefore a more effective transfer of resources toward the genuinely
needy as opposed to the politically well-connected.

Of course, no policy is perfectly immune to rent-seeking or political
manipulation, and others have expressed what seem to me to be some
[entirely](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1697728)
[reasonable](http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2014/03/a-worry-about-basic-income/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=a-worry-about-basic-income)
[concerns](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2013/11/what-are-some-of-the-biggest-problems-with-a-guaranteed-annual-income.html)
about a BIG in this respect. But nothing that I have seen has yet
convinced me that the problems with a BIG would be *worse*than those we
have now, and there still seems to me to be good reason to think those
problems would be considerably diminished.

**Less Invasive / Paternalistic**

One of the main differences between a BIG and the current welfare state
is the *unconditionality*of the former. Under a BIG, everybody gets a
check. Under the current welfare state, only people who meet the various
stipulated qualifications are eligible for assistance. The precise
nature of those qualifications varies from program to program, but can
include not [earning too
much](http://www.dpw.state.pa.us/foradults/supplementalnutritionassistanceprogram/snapincomelimits/),
not [earning too
little](http://www.irs.gov/Individuals/Do-I-Qualify-for-EITC%3F), not
[being on
drugs](http://www.ncsl.org/research/human-services/drug-testing-and-public-assistance.aspx),
not having [won the
lottery](http://www.ag.senate.gov/newsroom/press/release/2014-farm-bill-addressing-misuse-protecting-food-assistance),
making an earnest effort to find work, and so on.

Conditions are put on welfare in order to ensure that assistance goes to
the [deserving
poor](http://www.herinst.org/BusinessManagedDemocracy/culture/work/deserving.html),
and not to the undeserving. But distinguishing between the deserving and
undeserving is difficult business, and requires a variety of invasive,
demoralizing, and degrading inspections into the intimate details of
applicants’ lives. “Fill out this form, tell us about that man you live
with, pee in this cup, and submit to spot inspections of your home by
our social workers, or else.”

Maybe the state shouldn’t be in the business of giving out welfare at
all. Maybe it shouldn’t be running schools, or highways either. But, as
[Jacob Levy
notes](http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2014/02/an-argument-about-regulation/),
since it *does*do these things, libertarians have good reason to demand
that it does so in a way that is as “more rather than less compatible
with Hayek’s rule of law, with freedom from supervision and surveillance
by the bureaucracy, with the ability to get on with living their lives
rather than having to waste them proving their innocence.”

The conditional welfare state is not only invasive, it is heavily
*paternalistic*. Restrictions on eligibility are imposed in order to
encourage welfare recipients to live their lives in a way that the state
thinks is good for them: don’t have kids out of wedlock, don’t do drugs,
and get (or stay) married. And benefits are often given in-kind rather
than in cash precisely because the state doesn’t trust welfare
recipients to make what it regards as wise choices about how to spend
their money. This, despite the fact that both [economic
theory](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/1828082?uid=2&uid=4&sid=21104227011707)
and a
[growing](http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/01/03/to-beat-back-poverty-pay-the-poor/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0)
[body](http://cega.berkeley.edu/assets/cega_events/53/WGAPE_Sp2013_Blattman.pdf)
[of](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/opinion/let-them-eat-cash.html?smid=fb-share&_r=1)
[empirical](http://web.mit.edu/joha/www/publications/Haushofer_Shapiro_Policy_Brief_UCT_2013.10.22.pdf)
[evidence](http://www.vox.com/2014/6/26/5845258/mexico-tried-giving-poor-people-cash-instead-of-food-it-worked?utm_medium=social&utm_source=facebook&utm_name=share-button&utm_campaign=vox&utm_content=article-share-bottom)
suggest that individuals are better off with the freedom of choice that
a cash grant brings. In-kind grant programs like SNAP (food stamps)
persist in their present form not because they are effective but because
they are the product of a classic
[Bootleggers-and-Baptists](http://www.learnliberty.org/videos/bootleggers-and-baptists/)
coalition: well-meaning members of the public like the idea that welfare
recipients have to use their vouchers on food rather than alcohol and
cigarettes, and the [farm
lobby](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2013/09/snap_reform_give_the_poor_money_not_food_stamps.html)
likes that beneficiaries are forced to buy its own products. Poor
people, meanwhile, are deprived of the opportunity to save that a cash
grant would give them, and they are forced to waste time and effort
[trading what SNAP allows them to buy for what they really
want](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/01/10/snap_should_be_cash_instead.html).

**Utopia is Not an Option**

In Libertarian Utopia, we might not have any welfare state all, no
matter how limited or efficient. Many libertarians believe that any
redistribution of wealth by the state violates individual rights and is
therefore morally impermissible. And even those libertarians who do not
base their political ideology on a theory of individual rights will
worry that welfare states will produce perverse incentives – both on the
part of recipients and potential recipients, and in the political
processes that sustain and shape government policy.

But we do not live in Libertarian Utopia, nor have any of its prophets
yet produced any compelling plan for how to get There from Here.
Moreover, most people are not libertarians, and so unless we are willing
to impose our views on them by force, we must try to find policy
proposals that can command the assent of those who do not share our
fundamental moral commitments and empirical beliefs.

From this perspective, the question of social welfare policy becomes
less an exercise in ideal theory and more a problem of comparative
institutional analysis. The question is not whether a BIG is a perfectly
libertarian policy in every way, but whether it is *more*libertarian
than the other realistically available policy alternatives. I believe
that the considerations examined above provide us with very strong
reason for believing that it is.

But I also believe that a BIG need not be *merely*a compromise. Even in
a Libertarian Utopia, in other words, I think there would be good
reasons to provide a social safety net through the mechanism of a BIG. I
have written about some of these arguments
[before](http://www.libertarianism.org/columns/why-did-hayek-support-basic-income),
and while constraints of space prevent me from elaborating upon them
here, I am happy to do so in the discussion that follows this essay.

For now I will say only that if the idea of a social safety net strikes
many readers as *obviously*incompatible with libertarianism, this is
testament to the way in which an excessively narrow understanding of
libertarianism has come to dominate our political discourse. For many
people, it seems, libertarian thought begins and ends with the ideas of
Ayn Rand and Murray Rothbard. And, of course, both Rand and Rothbard
were indeed important libertarians, and libertarians from whose ideas I
and many others have profited immensely. But while those ideas have
played and continue to play an important role in the libertarian
intellectual tradition, [they do not *exhaust*that
tradition](http://www.cato-unbound.org/2012/04/02/matt-zwolinski-john-tomasi/bleeding-heart-history-libertarianism).
Once we adjust our eyes to see past the giants of Rand and Rothbard, it
is clear that the libertarian intellectual landscape is far more diverse
than it first appeared, and far *less* hostile to the idea of a social
safety net.

We can, of course, *define*libertarianism however we wish, and it is
possible to conceive it in a narrow enough way so as to rule out all
support for income redistribution by definitional fiat. But any
definition of libertarianism that is so narrow as to rule out the likes
of [John
Locke](http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/04/a-bleeding-heart-history-of-libertarian-thought-john-locke/),
[Thomas Paine](http://www.ssa.gov/history/tpaine3.html), [Adam
Smith](http://books.google.com/books?id=NBCIh8yrNP0C&pg=PA63&dq=short+history+of+distributive+justice+%22There+are+two+main+ways+in+which+he+did+this%22&hl=en&sa=X&ei=LG2xU-PnMc3coATA_oGQBw&ved=0CBwQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=short%20history%20of%20distributive%20justice%20%22There%20are%20two%20main%20ways%20in%20which%20he%20did%20this%22&f=false),
[Milton
Friedman](http://books.cat-v.org/economics/capitalism-and-freedom/chapter_12),
[Friedrich
Hayek](http://www.libertarianism.org/columns/why-did-hayek-support-basic-income),
[Robert
Nozick](http://www.laits.utexas.edu/poltheory/sidgwick/shortrefs/asu.c07.html),
[Loren
Lomasky](http://books.google.com/books?id=k_sbIxSV1wYC&pg=PA111&dq=loren+lomasky+person%27s+rights+%22A+Liberal+order+adequate+to+the+interest%22&hl=en&sa=X&ei=fPOtU_nCEYO9oQTj-YGIBQ&ved=0CB4Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=loren%20lomasky%20person's%20rights%20%22A%20Liberal%20order%20adequate%20to%20the%20interest%22&f=false),
and [Eric
Mack](https://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=ZGVmYXVsdGRvbWFpbnxwcm9mZXNzb3JlcmljbWFja3xneDoyYTNiYzI3Mzc5YjBjMWI4),
to name just a few, seems both historically distortive and pragmatically
unhelpful. The arguments these thinkers have advanced on behalf of a
(limited) social safety net might be *mistaken*. But that is something
to be established by a careful examination of the substance of the
arguments themselves. Arguments about what counts as a “real”
libertarian position, especially arguments poorly informed by the
writings of seminal historical and contemporary libertarian thinkers, do
little to advance the debate.

**A Few Words About Work Disincentives**

So far in this essay, I have said virtually nothing to say about the
many possible objections to a BIG. As a philosopher, this makes me
profoundly uncomfortable. I am comforted somewhat by the knowledge that
there will be plenty of time to explore these objections in the
discussion that follows – and almost certainly plenty of prompting to do
so by my fellow discussants! Nevertheless, before I bring this essay to
a close, I want to say just a few words about what I take to be the most
common, and also the most overrated, objection to a BIG.

Many people argue that a BIG will create a strong disincentive to work.
From a theoretical perspective, this makes sense. If you lower the cost
of unemployment relative to employment, you’re going to get more
unemployment. The famous [Negative Income Tax
experiments](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negative_income_tax#Implementation)
of the 1970s seem to lend some empirical support to this hypothesis.

I find this argument unimpressive for two reasons. First, it is not at
all clear that a BIG really would lead to a significant increase in
unemployment. The actual findings of the NIT experiments were [much more
ambiguous](http://works.bepress.com/widerquist/4/) than they have
generally been represented to be in the nonacademic press. And insofar
as a BIG allows welfare recipients who start working to keep *more*of
their money than they would under a conditional welfare system, we
should expect at least some *reduction*of work disincentives relative to
the current system.

But suppose that a BIG actually would, on net, increase unemployment
somewhat. The second response is: so what? Is it so obviously a flaw in
the system if it leads more parents to take time off work to stay home
with their children? Or college graduates to take a year off before
beginning to work? Or if, among the population as a whole, the balance
between work and leisure is slightly shifted toward the latter? My point
is not that there isn’t any story that could be told about why work
disincentives might be a problem. My point is simply that, even if they
were guaranteed to occur, they wouldn’t *obviously*be a problem.
Explaining why these somewhat increased disincentives are a problem
requires something more substantial in the way of economic,
sociological, and philosophical analysis than often seems to have been
assumed.

To my mind, there are other, much better objections to a BIG of the sort
I have discussed in this essay. How, for instance, will it handle the
issue of children? Would a BIG increase native resistance to increased
immigration and thereby hurt the truly needy global poor for the benefit
of the (relatively) wealthy American poor? And how could a BIG be
politically feasible, given the strong investment various interest
groups have in maintaining the current system? I look forward to
exploring these questions, and no doubt many more that I have not
anticipated, in the discussion that follows.

**Note**\

* * * * *

[[1]](#_ftnref1) I might also, if I were to stretch the phrase a little
more, apply it [to Friedrich Hayek’s
suggestion](http://books.google.com/books?id=nclLLOfnGqAC&pg=PA55&dq=a+certain+minimum+income+for+everyone,+or+a+sort+of+floor+below+which+nobody+need+fall+even+when+he+is+unable+to+provide+for+himself&hl=en&sa=X&ei=DJ20UrHfE8HYoASS3YKoDQ&ved=0CC8Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=a%2520certain%2520minimum%2520income%2520for%2520everyone%252C%2520or%2520a%2520sort%2520of%2520floor%2520below%2520which%2520nobody%2520need%2520fall%2520even%2520when%2520he%2520is%2520unable%2520to%2520provide%2520for%2520himself&f=false)
that the state should ensure “a certain minimum income for everyone … a
sort of floor below which nobody need fall even when he is unable to
provide for himself.” I have described Hayek’s proposal as a kind of BIG
[before](http://www.libertarianism.org/columns/why-did-hayek-support-basic-income).
But see Don Arthur’s [carefully researched
essay](http://clubtroppo.com.au/2014/01/02/did-hayek-support-a-basic-income-guarantee/)
for a contrasting interpretation.

### Also from This Issue

**Response Essays**

-   **[Is a Basic Income
    Permissible?](/2014/08/06/michael-huemer/basic-income-permissible)**
    by [Michael Huemer](/contributors/michael-huemer)

    Michael Huemer argues that while a basic income guarantee might be
    better than the status quo, this amounts to some rather faint
    praise. A basic income guarantee would necessarily violate some
    people’s rights, while a fully legitimate government must never
    violate anyone’s rights. The problem of political authority will
    likely remain a barrier to all similar proposals, even if we may
    happen to find this problem’s full implications troubling.

-   **[When the Basic Income Guarantee Meets the Political
    Process](/2014/08/08/jim-manzi/when-basic-income-guarantee-meets-political-process)**
    by [Jim Manzi](/contributors/jim-manzi)

    Jim Manzi doubts that a basic income guarantee would emerge from our
    political process while still bearing its purportedly beneficial
    features. Compromises would proliferate, as would paternalistic
    controls. The interests of the bureaucracy would assert themselves,
    and the temptation to make exceptions would prove overwhelming to
    the electorate. Moreover, when a basic income guarantee has been
    tried in practice, the result has consistently been a withdrawal of
    participants’ labor. Scaled to an entire society, the result of such
    a withdrawal may be dire.

-   [Tweet](http://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cato-unbound.org%2F2014%2F08%2F04%2Fmatt-zwolinski%2Fpragmatic-libertarian-case-basic-income-guarantee&text=The%20Pragmatic%20Libertarian%20Case%20for%20a%20Basic%20Income%20Guarantee&via=CatoUnbound&related=CatoInstitute)
-   [Like](http://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cato-unbound.org%2F2014%2F08%2F04%2Fmatt-zwolinski%2Fpragmatic-libertarian-case-basic-income-guarantee)
-   [Share](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cato-unbound.org%2F2014%2F08%2F04%2Fmatt-zwolinski%2Fpragmatic-libertarian-case-basic-income-guarantee)

[View the discussion
thread.](http://catounbound.disqus.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cato-unbound.org%2F2014%2F08%2F04%2Fmatt-zwolinski%2Fpragmatic-libertarian-case-basic-income-guarantee)

### Disclaimer

*Cato Unbound* is a forum for the discussion of diverse and often
controversial ideas and opinions. The views expressed on the website
belong to their authors alone and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the staff or supporters of the Cato Institute.

### Also from Cato

-   [Cato.org](http://www.cato.org)
-   [Student Programs](http://www.cato.org/students)
-   [DownsizingGovernment.org](http://www.downsizinggovernment.org)
-   [Libertarianism.org](http://www.libertarianism.org)
-   [HumanProgress.org](http://humanprogress.org/)
-   [PoliceMisconduct.net](http://www.policemisconduct.net)
-   [Overlawyered](http://overlawyered.com/)
-   [ElCato.org](http://www.elcato.org)

### Social Media

-   [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/CatoUnbound)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/CatoUnbound)
-   [RSS](/rss)

[![image](/sites/cato-unbound.org/files/logo.png)](http://www.cato.org)

Cato Institute\
 1000 Massachusetts Ave, NW\
 Washington, DC 20001-5403

-   Phone (202) 842 0200
-   Fax (202) 842 3490


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.cato-unbound.org/2014/08/04/matt-zwolinski/pragmatic-libertarian-case-basic-income-guarantee
