-   [Recent Articles](index.html)
-   [By Topic](by-topic.html)
-   [By Year](by-year.html)
-   [About me](about.html)

Programming without objects
===========================

17.09.2014 [Permalink](a__2014-09-17__Programming-without-objects.html)

Recently I gave an [itemis](http://www.itemis.com) internal talk about
basic functional programming (FP) concepts. Towards the end I made a
claim that objects and their blueprints (a.k.a. classes) have severe
downsides and that it is much better to "leave data alone", which is
exactly how Clojure and Haskell treat this subject.

I fully acknowledge that such a statement is disturbing to hear,
especially if your professional thinking was shaped by OOP
paradigm^[1](#fn1)^ for 20 years or more. I know this well, because that
was exactly my situation two years ago.

So let's take a closer look at the OO class as provided by Java, Scala
or C\# and think a little bit about it's features, strengths and
weaknesses. Subsequently, I'll explain how to do better without classes
and objects.

The OO class
------------

An OO class bundles data and implementation related to this data. A good
OO class hides any details about implementation and data, if they're not
supposed to be part of the API. According to widespread belief, the good
OO class reduces complexity because any client using instances of it
(a.k.a the objects) will not and cannot deal with those implementation
details.

So, we can see three striking aspects here: API as formed by the public
members, data declaration and method implementation. But there is much
more to it:

-   Instances of a class have identity by default. Two objects are the
    same if and only if both share the same address in memory which
    gives us a relation of intensional equality on their data.
-   The reference to an object is passed as implicit first argument to
    any method invocation on the object, available through `this` or
    `self`.
-   A class is a type.
-   Inheritance between classes enables subtyping and allows subclasses
    to reuse method implementations and data declarations of their
    superclasses.
-   Methods can be "polymorphic" which only means that in order to
    invoke a method objects do a dispatch over the type of the implicit
    first argument.
-   Classes can have type variables to generalize their functionality
    over a range of other types.
-   Classes act as namespaces for inner classes and static members.
-   Classes can support already existing contracts of abstract types (in
    Java called "interfaces") by implementing those.

That's a lot of stuff, and I probably did not list everything that
classes provide. The first thing we can state is that a class is not
"simple" in the sense that [it does only one
thing](http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy). In fact, it
does a lot of things. But so what? After all, the concept is so old and
so widely known that we may accept it anyway.

Besides the class being a complex thing there are other disadvantages
that most OO programmers are somehow aware of but tend to accept like
laws of nature^[2](#fn2)^.

Next I'll discuss a few of these weaknesses in detail:

### Equality

Let's look at intensional equality as provided by object identity.
Apparently this is not what we want at all times, otherwise we wouldn't
see this pattern called
[ValueObject](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/ValueObject.html)
^[3](#fn3)^. A type like Javas `String` is a well-known example of a
successful ValueObject implementation. The price for this freedom of
choice is a rule that the `==` operator is almost useless and we must
use `equals` because only it's implementation can decide what kind of
equality relation is in effect. The numerous tutorials and blog posts
how to correctly implement `equals` and `hashCode` are witness that this
topic is not easy to get right. In addition we must be very careful when
using a potentially mutable object as a key in a map or item in a set.
If it's not a value a lookup might fail miserably (and unexpectedly).

### Concurrency

The conflation of mutable data and object identity is also a problem in
another regard: concurrency. Those objects not acting as values must be
protected from race conditions and stale memory, either by thread
confinement or by synchronization which is hard to do right in order to
avoid dead locks or live locks.

### This

Let's turn to the implicit first argument, in Java and C\# it's referred
to by the keyword `this`. It allows us to invoke methods on an object
`Sam` by stating `Sam.doThis()` or `Sam.doThat()` which sounds similar
to natural language. So, we can consider this as syntactic sugar to ease
understanding in cases where a "subject verb" formulation makes
sense^[4](#fn4)^. But wait, what happens if we're not able to use a
method implemented in a class? More recent languages offer [extension
methods](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extension_method) (in [Scala
realizable](https://coderwall.com/p/4clu3a) using `implicit`) to help
make our notation more consistent. Thus, in order to put the first
argument in front of the method name to improve readability we're
required to master an additional concept.

### Dispatch

Objects support polymorphism, which was the really exotic feature back
then when I learned OOP. Actually, the OO "polymorphic method
invocation" is a special case of a function invocation dispatch, namely
a dispatch over the type of the implicit first argument. So this fancy
p-thing turns out to be a somewhat arbitrary limitation of a very
powerful concept.

### Inheritance

Implementation inheritance creates a "is-a" relation between types
(giving birth to terms like "superclass" and "subclass"), shares API,
and hard-wires this with reuse of data declarations and method
implementations. But what can you do if you want one without the other?
Well, if you don't want to reuse but only define type relations and
share API you can employ interfaces, which is simple and effective. Now
the other way around: what can you do to reuse implementations without
tying a class by `extends` to an existing class? The options I know are:

-   Use static methods that expect a type declared by an interface
    (which might force some data members to become publicly accessible).
    Here again, extension methods might jump in to reduce syntatic
    disturbances.
-   Use [delegation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delegation_pattern),
    so the class in need for existing implementations points to a class
    containing the shared methods. Each delegating method invokes the
    implementation from the other class, which creates much boilerplate
    if the number of methods is high.

Implementation inheritance is a very good example for adding much
conceptual complexity without giving us the full power of the ideas it
builds upon. In fact, the debate about the potential harm that it brings
(and how [other
approaches](http://berniesumption.com/software/inheritance-is-evil-and-must-be-destroyed/)
might remedy this) is nearly as old as the idea itself.

### Encapsulation of data

"Information hiding" makes objects opaque, that's it's purpose. It seems
useful if objects contain private mutable data necessary to implement
stateful behaviour. However, with respect to concurrency and more
algebraic data transformation this encapsulation hurts. It hurts because
we don't know what's underneath an objects API and the last thing we
want to have is mutable state that we're not aware of. It hurts that if
we want to work with it's data we have to ask for every single bit of
it.

The common solution to the latter problem is to use reflection, and
that's exactly what all advanced frameworks do to uniformly implement
their behaviour on top of user-defined classes that contain data.

On the other hand, we all have learned that reflection is dangerous, it
circumvents the type system, which may lead to all kinds of errors
showing up only at runtime. So most programmers resort to work with
objects in a very tedious way, creating many times more code compared to
what they would have written in a different language.

### Judging the OO class

So far, we have seen that OO classes are not ideal. They mix up a lot of
features while often providing only a narrow subset of what a more
general concept is able to do for us. Resulting programs are not only
hard to do right, in terms of lines of code they tend to require a
multiple compared to programs written in modern FP languages. Since
system size is a significant cost driver in maintenance, OOP
economically seems to me as a mistake when you have other techniques at
your disposal.

When it was introduced more than 20 years ago the OO class brought
encapsulation and polymorphism into the game which was beneficial. Thus,
OOP was clearly better than procedural programming. But a lot of time
has passed since then and we learned much about all the little and
not-so-little flaws. It's time to move on...

A better way
------------

Now, that I have discredited the OO class as offered to you by Java, C\#
or other mainstream OOP languages I feel the duty to show you an
alternative as it is available in Clojure and Haskell. It's based on the
following fundamentals:

Data is immutable, and any complex data structure (regardless of being
more like a map or a list) behaves like a value: you can't change it.
But you can get new values that share a lot of data with what previously
existed. The key to make this approach feasible are so-called
["persistent data
structures"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistent_data_structure).
They combine immutability with efficiency.

Data is commonly structured using very few types of collections: in
Clojure these are vectors, maps and sets, in Haskell you have lists,
maps, sets and tuples. To combine a type with a map-like behaviour
Clojure gives us the record. Haskell offers record syntax which is
preferable over tuples to model more complex domain data. Resulting
"instances" of records are immutable and their fields are public.

Functions are not part of records, although the Haskell compiler as well
as the Clojure `defrecord` macro derive some related default
implementations for formatting, parsing, ordering and comparing record
values. In both languages we can nicely access pieces of these values
and cheaply derive new values from existing ones. No one needs to
implement constructors, getters, setters, `toString`, `equals` or
`hashCode`.

### Defining data structures

Here's an example of some records defined in Haskell:

    module Accounting where
    data Address = Address { street :: String
                           , city :: String
                           , zipcode :: String} 
                 deriving (Show, Read, Eq, Ord)

    data Person = Person { name :: String
                         , address :: Address}
                deriving (Show, Read, Eq, Ord)

    data Account = Account { owner :: Person
                           , entries :: [Int]}
                 deriving (Show, Read, Eq, Ord)

And here's what it looks like in (untyped) Clojure^[5](#fn5)^:

    (ns accounting)
    (defrecord Address [street zipcode city])

    (defrecord Person [name address])

    (defrecord Account [owner entries])      

Let's see what we now have got:

-   Thread-safe data.
-   Extensional equality.
-   Types.
-   No subtyping.
-   Reasonable default implementations of basic functionality.
-   Complex data based on very few composable collection types.

The last item can hardly be overrated: since we use only few common
collection types we can immediatly apply a vast set of data
transformation functions like `map`, `filter`, `reduce`/`foldl` and
friends. It needs some practice, but it'll take you to a whole new level
of expressing data transformation logic.

But where should we implement individual domain logic?

### Adding domain functionality

If we only want to implement functions that act on some type of data we
can pass a value as (for example) first argument to those. To denote the
relation between the record and the functions we implement these in the
same Clojure namespace or Haskell module that the record definition
lives in.

Let's add a Haskell function that calculates the balance for an account
(please note that the Account entries are a list of integers):

    balance :: Account -> Int
    balance (Account _ es) = foldl (+) 0 es

Now the Clojure equivalent:

    (defn balance
      [{es :entries}]
      (reduce + es))

If we now want to call these functions in an OO like "subject verb"
manner we would take Clojure's thread-first macro `->`. To get the
balance of an account `a` we can use the expression `(-> a balance)`.
Or, given that `p` is a Person, the expression `(-> p :address :city)`
allows us to retrieve the value of the `city` field.

In Haskell we need an additional function definition to introduce an
operator that allows us to flip the order:

    (-:) :: a -> (a -> b) -> b
    x -: f = f x

Now we can calculate the balance for an account `a` using `a-:balance`,
or access the city field with an expression `p-:address-:city`.

Please note, that the mechanisms allowing us to flip the
function-argument-order are totally unrelated to records or any other
kind of data structure.

Ok, that was easy. For implementing domain logic we now have

-   Ordinary functions taking the record as parameter.
-   A loose "belongs-to" relation between data and functions via
    namespace/module organization.
-   Independent "syntactic sugar" regarding how we can denote function
    application.
-   No hassle when we want to extend functionality related to the data
    without being able to alter the original namespace/module.

From an OO perspective this looks like static functions on data,
something described by the term [Anemic Domain
Model](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anemic_domain_model). I can almost
hear that inside any long-term OO practitioners head it starts to
scream: "But this is wrong! You must combine data and functions, you
must encapsulate this in an entity class!"

After doing this for more than 20 years, I just ask "Why? What's the
benefit? And how is this idea actually applied in thousands of systems?
Does it serve us well?" My answer today is a clear "No, it doesn't".
Actually keeping these things separate is simpler and makes the pieces
more composable. Admittedly, to make it significantly better than
procedural programming we have to add a few language features you have
been missing in OO for so long. To see this read on, now the fun begins:

### Polymorphism

Both languages allow bundling of function signatures to connect an
abstraction with an API. Clojure calls these "protocols", Haskell calls
these "type classes", both share noticable similarities with Java
interfaces. But in contrast to Java, we can declare that types
participate in these abstractions, regardless of whether the
protocol/type class existed before the record/type declaration or not.

To illustrate this with our neat example, we introduce an abstraction
that promises to give us somehow the total sum of some numeric data.
Let's start with the Clojure protocol:

    (defprotocol Sum
      (totals [x]))

The corresponding type class in Haskell looks like that:

    class Sum a where
      totals :: a -> Int

This lets us introduce polymorphic functions for types without touching
the types, thus essentially solving the [expression
problem](http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/wadler/papers/expression/expression.txt),
because it let's us apply existing functions that only rely on
protocols/type classes to new types.

In Clojure we can extend the protocol to an existing type like so:

    (extend-protocol Sum
      Account
      (totals [acc] (balance acc)))

And in Haskell we make an instance:

    instance Sum Account where
      totals = balance

It should be easy to spot the similarity. In both cases we implement the
missing functionality based on the concrete, existing type. We're now
able to apply `totals` on any `Account` instance because `Account` now
supports the contract. What would you do for a similar effect in OO
land?^[6](#fn6)^

With this, the story of function implementation reuse becomes very
different: protocols/type classes are a means to hide differences
between concrete types. This allows us to create a large number of
functions that rely solely on abstractions, not concrete types. Instead
of each object carrying the methods of it's class (and superclasses)
around, we have independent functions over small abstractions. Each type
of record can decide where it participates in, no matter what existed
first. This drastically reduces the overall number of function
implementations and thus the size of the resulting system.

Perhaps you now have a first idea of the power of the approach to
polymorphism in Clojure and Haskell, but wait, polymorphism is still
only a special case of dispatching function invocations.

### Other ways for dispatching

Let's first look from a conceptual perspective what dispatching is all
about: you apply a function to some arguments and some mechanism decides
which implementation is actually used. So the easiest way to build a
runtime dispatcher in an imperative language is a `switch` statement.
What's the problem with this approach? It's tedious to write and it
conflates branching logic with the actual implementation of the case
specific logic.

To come up with a better solution, Haskell and Clojure take very
different approaches, but both excel what any OO programmer is commonly
used to.

Haskell applies "Pattern Matching" to argument values, which essentially
combines deconstruction of data structures, binding of symbols to
values, and -- here comes the dispatch -- branching according to matched
patterns in the data structure. It's already powerful and it can be
extended by using "guards" which represent additional conditions. I
won't go into the details here, but if you're interested I recommend
this [chapter from "Learn You a Haskell for Great
Good"](http://learnyouahaskell.com/syntax-in-functions#pattern-matching).

Clojure "Multimethods" are completely different. Essentially they
consist of two parts. One is a dispatch function, and the other part is
a bunch of functions to be chosen from according to the dispatch value
that the dispatch function returns for an invocation. The dispatch
function can contain any calculation, and in addition it is possible to
define hierarchies of dispatch values, similar to what can be done with
type based multiple inheritance in OO languages like C++. Again very
powerful, and if you're interested in the details here's an [online
excerpt of "Clojure in
Action"](https://weblogs.java.net/blog/manningpubs/archive/2013/02/20/multimethods-clojure).

By now, I hope you are able to see that Clojure and Haskell open the
door to a different but more powerful way to design systems. The
interesting features of the OO class like dispatching and ease of
implementation reuse through inheritance fade in the light of more
general concepts of todays FP languages.

To complete the picture here's my discussion of some left-over minor
features that OO classes provide, namely type parameters, encapsulation
and intensional equality.

### Type parameters

In case of Haskell, type parameters are available for types (used in
so-called "type constructors") and type classes. If you know Java
Generics then the term "type variable" is a good match for "type
parameter". These can be combined with constraints to restrict the set
of admissable types. So, with Haskell you don't loose anything.

Clojure is basically untyped, therefore the whole concept doesn't apply.
This gives more freedom, but also more responsibility. However, [Typed
Clojure](http://typedclojure.org/) adds compile-time static type
checking, if type annotations were provided. For functions, Typed
Clojure offers type parameters. But, AFAIK, and by the time of this
writing, Typed Clojure doesn't offer type parameters for records.

### Encapsulation

The OO practitioner will have noticed that the very important OO idea of
visibility of members seems to be completely missing in Clojure and
Haskell. Which is true regarding data.

Restriction of visibility in OO can have two reasons:

-   Foreign code must not rely on a members value because it's not part
    of the API and it might be subject to change without warning.
-   Foreign code must not be allowed to change a members value when this
    could bring the object into an inconsistent state.

As available in todays mainstream OO languages, I don't see that the
first reason is sufficiently covered by technical visibility, because
the notion of "foreign" can not be adequately encoded. In fact, an idea
like
[PublishedInterface](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/PublishedInterface.html)
makes only sense because visibility does not express our intent. Instead
of a technical restriction, sheer documentation seems to be a better way
to express how reliable a piece of a data structure is.

Regarding the second reason, immutable data and referential transparency
is certainly helpful. A system where most of the functions don't rely on
mutable state is less prone to failure caused by erroneous modification
of some state. Of course, it is still possible to bring data into an
inconsistent state and pass this to functions which signal an exception.
But the same is possible for mutable objects, the only difference being
that a setter signals an exception a bit earlier. Eventually validation
must detect this at the earliest possible point in time to give feedback
to the user or a external system. This is true regardless of the
paradigm.

Regarding visibility of functions, Haskell as well as Clojure give us a
means to make a subset of them available in other modules / namespaces
and to protect all others from public usage. Due to it's type system
Haskell can additionally protect data structures from being used in
foreign modules.

### Intensional Equality

In a language that consistently uses value semantics there is only
extensional equality and the test for equality works everywhere with `=`
or `==`. If we need identity in our data then we can resort to the same
mechanism that we use for records in a relational database. Either
define an `id` function that makes use of some of the fields or add a
[surrogate key](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surrogate_key). Anyway, in
a system with minimal mutable state the appetite for object identity
diminishes rapidly.

### Are there any downsides?

Of course, apart from being different and requiring us to learn some
stuff, programming without objects -- especially without mutable state
-- sometimes calls for ideas and concepts that we would never see in
OOP^[7](#fn7)^. For example, there is the concept of a
[zipper](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2010/01/13/zippers-making-functional-upda/)
to manipulate tree-like data which is dispensable in OO because we can
just hold onto a node in a tree in order to modify it efficiently in
place. Or, you can't create cyclic dependencies in data structures. In
my experience, you seldom encounter these restrictions, and either
detect that your idea was crap anyway, or that there is an unexpected
but elegant solution available.

A system without side-effects is a useless thing. So real-life
functional languages offer ways to enable them. By being either forced
by the compiler to wrap side-effects (as in Haskell) or by being
punished by obstrusive API calls (as in Clojure) we put side-effects at
specific places and handle them with great care. This affects the
structure of the system. But it is a good thing, because having
referential transparency in large parts of a code base is a breeze when
it comes to testing, parallelization or simply understanding what code
does.

You may argue that imperative programming leads to more efficient
programs compared to functional programming. You're right. Manual memory
management is also likely to be more efficient than relying on a garbage
collector. If done correctly. Is there anyone on the JVM missing manual
memory management? No? So, there is certainly a price. But modern
multi-core hardware as available in enterprise computing is not as
expensive as precious programmer time.

### Conclusion

This was really a long journey. I started by breaking down and analyzing
the features that the good old OO class offers. I continued with showing
how you can do the same and more using a modern FP language. I know, it
looks strange and I promise it feels strange... but only in the
beginning. In the end you're much better off learning how to use the
power of a modern language like Clojure or Haskell.

* * * * *

^1.\\ Here,\\ I\\ refer\\ to\\ OO\\ concepts\\ as\\ available\\ today\\ in\\ the\\ mainstream.\\ Initially,\\ objects\\ were\\ planned\\ to\\ be\\ more\\ like\\ autonomous\\ cells\\ that\\ exchange\\ messages,\\ very\\ similar\\ to\\ what\\ the\\ [Actor\\ model](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model)\\ provides.\\ So\\ in\\ a\\ sense,\\ what\\ we\\ think\\ of\\ today\\ as\\ OOP\\ is\\ not\\ what\\ its\\ [inventors\\ thought](http://www.purl.org/stefan_ram/pub/doc_kay_oop_en)\\ it\\ should\\ be.^

^2.\\ Which\\ is\\ of\\ course\\ only\\ true,\\ if\\ OOP\\ languages\\ are\\ all\\ you\\ know.\\ Read\\ about\\ the\\ [Blub\\ Paradox](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?BlubParadox)\\ to\\ get\\ an\\ idea\\ why\\ it\\ is\\ so\\ hard\\ to\\ pick\\ up\\ totally\\ different\\ approaches\\ to\\ programming.^

^3.\\ Regarding\\ equality\\ of\\ data\\ the\\ term\\ "ValueObject"\\ is\\ IMO\\ an\\ outright\\ misnomer.\\ A\\ Value\\ supports\\ [extensional\\ equality](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/course/cs2510h/chapter_equality.html)\\ whereas\\ an\\ Object\\ has\\ identity\\ and\\ therefore\\ supports\\ [intensional\\ equality](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/course/cs2510h/Intensional_equality.html).\\ The\\ term\\ "Value"\\ alone\\ would\\ have\\ been\\ better.^

^4.\\ This\\ "subject\\ verb"\\ order\\ isn't\\ appropriate\\ in\\ every\\ situation,\\ as\\ Steve\\ Yegge\\ enjoyably\\ points\\ out\\ in\\ his\\ famous\\ blog\\ post\\ [Execution\\ in\\ the\\ Kingdom\\ of\\ Nouns](http://steve-yegge.blogspot.de/2006/03/execution-in-kingdom-of-nouns.html).^

^5.\\ If\\ you\\ are\\ concerned\\ about\\ missing\\ type\\ annotations\\ in\\ Clojure\\ records:\\ There\\ exists\\ an\\ optional\\ type\\ system\\ called\\ [Typed\\ Clojure](http://typedclojure.org/)\\ that\\ allows\\ to\\ add\\ compile-time\\ static\\ type\\ checking.\\ Alternatively\\ you\\ can\\ use\\ libraries\\ like\\ [Domaintypes](https://github.com/friemen/domaintypes)\\ or\\ [Prismatic\\ Schema](https://github.com/Prismatic/schema)\\ to\\ add\\ type-like\\ notation\\ and\\ get\\ corresponding\\ runtime\\ validation.^

^6.\\ What\\ can\\ we\\ do\\ in\\ OO\\ to\\ add\\ methods\\ contained\\ in\\ a\\ new\\ interface\\ to\\ an\\ existing\\ type\\ without\\ touching\\ the\\ types\\ implementation?\\ Use\\ the\\ [Adapter\\ pattern](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adapter_pattern),\\ if\\ you're\\ lucky\\ to\\ influence\\ how\\ instances\\ are\\ created,\\ and\\ if\\ you're\\ able\\ to\\ retain\\ a\\ reasonable\\ equality\\ relation\\ between\\ wrapped\\ and\\ unwrapped\\ instances.\\ Good\\ luck!^

^7.\\ No,\\ I\\ don't\\ refer\\ to\\ Monads.\\ Java\\ 8\\ introduced\\ [Optional](http://java.dzone.com/articles/whats-wrong-java-8-part-iv)\\ which\\ is\\ only\\ a\\ flavor\\ of\\ the\\ Haskell\\ Maybe\\ Monad.\\ So\\ there\\ is\\ evidence\\ that\\ the\\ idea\\ is\\ useful\\ in\\ OOP.^

Impressum: Für den Inhalt dieser Seiten ist Falko Riemenschneider,
Schumanstraße 35, 53113 Bonn verantwortlich.

Haftungshinweis: Mein Webangebot enthält Links zu externen Webseiten
Dritter, auf deren Inhalte ich keinen Einfluss habe. Deshalb kann ich
für diese fremden Inhalte auch keine Gewähr übernehmen. Für die Inhalte
der verlinkten Seiten ist stets der jeweilige Anbieter oder Betreiber
der Seiten verantwortlich. Die verlinkten Seiten wurden zum Zeitpunkt
der Verlinkung auf mögliche Rechtsverstöße überprüft. Rechtswidrige
Inhalte waren zum Zeitpunkt der Verlinkung nicht erkennbar. Eine
permanente inhaltliche Kontrolle der verlinkten Seiten ist jedoch ohne
konkrete Anhaltspunkte einer Rechtsverletzung nicht zumutbar. Bei
Bekanntwerden von Rechtsverletzungen werde ich derartige Links umgehend
entfernen.

This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://www.falkoriemenschneider.de/a__2014-09-17__Programming-without-objects.html
