[Parallel Universe](http://www.paralleluniverse.co)
[](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co)

### The Parallel Universe Blog

February 20, 2014

Reactive (Dataflow) Programming in Java and Clojure with Quasar and Pulsar
==========================================================================

[Reactive
programming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactive_programming) is a
programming paradigm that helps programmers process data that flows into
the system or is computed by the system asynchronously. Reactive
programming achieves this through constructs that organize concurrency
into a simple, understandable form. But before we go on to show how
reactive programming is used, it’s important to clarify what problem it
solves. To do that, we need to better define two concepts that can
sometimes be used interchangeably: parallelism and concurrency.

When contrasting the two, parallelism is usually defined as using
multiple processing cores (in parallel, of course) to expedite a
computation (say, like inverting a matrix). Parallelism is an
*implementation detail* of an algorithm used to solve a problem. It is
achieved by splitting the data into small bits and feeding them to as
many processors as we have available. When talking about parallelism
(sometimes better described as *data parallelism*), the various software
and hardware threads *cooperate* to solve the problem at hand. Clojure’s
reducers and Java 8’s streams provide transparent parallelism as an
implementation detail of various data-manipulation operations.

Concurrency, on the other hand, is not a feature of the algorithm used
to solve a problem but one of the problem itself (say, like routing all
the tweets flowing concurrently into Twitter). Concurrency concerns
itself with managing many concurrenct computations, each processing data
that can arrive at any time. When dealing with concurrent computations,
it is often beneficial to use multiple processing cores as well, only in
that case, the various software and hardware threads *compete* with each
other over system resources rather than cooperate. So, to sum up,
parallelism: implementation detail, cooperation; concurrency: nature of
the domain, competition.

Unlike data parallelism, which can often be completely hidden away from
the programmer, concurrency requires the programmer to adopt particular
programming paradigms that are required to tackle the problem. Reactive
Programming (sometimes also called dataflow programming) is one such
paradigm. In this blog post we’ll explore how JVM lightweight threads,
combined with reactive constructs, let us work with asynchronous data
using [Quasar](https://github.com/puniverse/quasar) and its Clojure API,
[Pulsar](https://github.com/puniverse/pulsar). Reactive programming can
be used either in a traditional, imperative style, or in a functional
style. We’ll try both and show how each has its strengths and
weaknesses.

The main idea behind reactive programming is explicitly modeling the
flow of data through the application in such a way that separates the
code from concerns about when its input data arrives. This way, various
pieces of data arrive asynchronously, some concurrently, and the code
that processes them is oblivious to when they were produced.

Quasar’s reactive constructs achive their simplicity and performance
first and foremost through the use of fibers, which are [true
lightweight
threads](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/06/fibers-threads-strands/).
Fibers are similar to regular Java threads (managed directly by the OS
kernel), only they incur very little RAM and performance overhead, so
much so that you needn’t think twice before launching a new fiber.
Fibers are so lightweight that you can easily have hundreds of thousands
of them, or even millions, running concurrently in a single JVM
instance.

While the code here will make use of fibers, it’s important to note that
all of Quasar’s reactive constructs work equally well when used on plain
Java threads (that’s because fibers and threads are both [abstracted by
Quasar into a single abstraction called
strands](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/06/fibers-threads-strands/)).

To make the Java code more concise, we’ll use Java 8 lambdas (supported
by the current dev version of Quasar, 0.5.0-SNAPSHOT), but they work
equally well with the familiar Java anonymous classes. Also, the code
examples below require Quasar/Pulsar 0.5.0 (the development version),
but the same effects could be achieved equally well with the 0.4.0
release, albeit with a slightly less convenient API.

DelayedVals and Promises
------------------------

The first reactive construct used by Quasar is the `DelayedVal`. A
DelayedVal is a *constant value* that is computed (once) by the program
(or is an input to it), at an unknown time. The DelayedVal is set once
at any point in the program’s lifetime, but when you want to use it, you
need not concern yourself with whether the value has been set yet or
not. If it has not been set, the strand (fiber or thread) trying to read
it will block until the value is available (if it sounds like a future,
that’s because it is; `DelayedVal` implements the `Future` interface).

Here’s a Java example using fibers and DelayedVals:

    DelayedVal<Integer> x = new DelayedVal<>();
    DelayedVal<Integer> y = new DelayedVal<>();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        System.out.println("x + y = " + (x.get() + y.get()));
    }).start();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        Strand.sleep(1000);
        x.set(5);
    }).start();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        Strand.sleep(400);
        y.set(10);
    }).start();

Running this code will print *x + y = 15*. Note how the first fiber
simply reads `x` and `y`, even though their values are set by two
different fibers at two different times. Because we’re using fibers,
blocking until the DelayVal is set bears no noticeable overhead at all.

DelayedVals are very similar to Clojure promises, so in Pulsar,
DelayedVals are defined with the
`co.paralleluniverse.pulsar.core/promise` function, which follows the
same API as `clojure.core/promise`, only it supports fibers as well as
threads. Here’s an example in Clojure:

    (use 'co.paralleluniverse.pulsar.core)

    (let [v1 (promise)
         v2 (promise)
         v3 (promise)
         v4 (promise)
         f1 (spawn-fiber  #(deliver v2 (+ @v1 1)))
         t1 (spawn-thread #(deliver v3 (+ @v1 @v2)))
         f2 (spawn-fiber  #(deliver v4 (+ @v3 @v2)))]
     (sleep 50)
     (deliver v1 1)
     @v4) ; => 5

Notice how this Clojure example uses fibers as well as regular threads.

But Pulsar’s promises have one additional, handy, feature. If you pass
an optional function to `promise`, a new fiber running that function
will be spawned, and the promise will receive the value returned from
the function. Here’s an example:

    (use 'co.paralleluniverse.pulsar.core)

    (let [v0 (promise)
         v1 (promise)
         v2 (promise #(+ @v1 1))
         v3 (promise #(+ @v1 @v2))
         v4 (promise #(* (+ @v3 @v2) @v0))]
     (sleep 50)
     (deliver v1 1)
     (deliver v0 2)
     @v4) ; => 10

A similar feature has been added to the Java API in the current dev
version:

    DelayedVal<Integer> x = new DelayedVal<>();
    DelayedVal<Integer> y = new DelayedVal<>();
    DelayedVal<Integer> z = new DelayedVal<>(() -> x.get() + y.get());

    new Fiber(() -> {
        System.out.println("x + y = " + z.get());
    }).start();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        Strand.sleep(1000);
        x.set(5);
    }).start();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        Strand.sleep(400);
        y.set(10);
    }).start();

Channels, Topics and Tickers
----------------------------

Because they can only represent constant values, DelayedVals/promises
can only get us so far. We also need the ability to represent values
that change over time (I hope Rich Hickey forgives me in using the word
“value” in a non-rigorous manner). Quasar channels (modelled after Go
channels) can be used to represent a sequence of changing values, with
each message sent to the channel corresponding to an update event. But
Quasar’s channels are not enough by themselves, as they are usually read
by a single consumer, while we’d like to publish the changing value to
any interested party. To do that, we’ll use topics. Topics are a special
kind of channel that replicates values written to it and sends them to
any number of *subscribed* channels. Subscribers can join and leave the
topic at any time.

Let’s look at an example that uses both topics and DelayedVals:

    DelayedVal<Integer> x = new DelayedVal<>();
    Topic<Integer> t = new Topic<>();
            
    Fiber f1 = new Fiber(() -> {
        Channel<Integer> c = t.subscribe(Channels.newChannel(0)); // a regular channel with no internal buffer
        for (Integer m; (m = c.receive()) != null;)
            System.out.println("=> " + (m + x.get()));
    }).start();

    Fiber f2 = new Fiber(() -> {
        try {
            IntChannel c = t.subscribe(Channels.newIntChannel(3)); // a primitive int channel with a buffer of size 3
            for (;;)
                System.out.println("-> " + (x.get() * c.receiveInt()));
        } catch (ReceivePort.EOFException e) {
        }
    }).start();

    // some time in the future, we'll set x
    new Fiber(() -> {
        Strand.sleep(1000);
        x.set(5);
    }).start();

    // also, t changes from time to time
    new Fiber(() -> {
        for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
            Strand.sleep(100);
            t.send(ThreadLocalRandom.current().nextInt(100));
        }
        t.close();
    }).start();

    f1.join();
    f2.join();

Just for fun, the first fiber subscribes a regular generic channel to
the topic, while the second subscribes a primitive `int` channel.

Here’s the exact same example in Clojure (remember, we’re still using
the imperative style):

    (use 'co.paralleluniverse.pulsar.core)
    (import 'co.paralleluniverse.strands.channels.ReceivePort$EOFException)

    (let [x (promise)
          t (topic)
          f1 (spawn-fiber (fn []
                            (let [c (subscribe! t (channel 0))]
                              (loop []
                                (when-let [m (rcv c)]
                                  (println "=>" (+ m @x))
                                  (recur))))))
          f2 (spawn-fiber (fn []
                            (let [c (subscribe! t (int-channel 3))]
                              (try
                                (loop []
                                  (println "->" (* @x (rcv-int c)))
                                  (recur))
                                (catch ReceivePort$EOFException e)))))]
      (spawn-fiber (fn []
                     (sleep 1000)
                     (deliver x 5)))
      (spawn-fiber (fn []
                        (dotimes [i 10]
                          (sleep 100)
                          (snd t (rand-int 100)))
                        (close! t)))

      (join [f1 f2]))

There is one problem with topics, though: as channels may have a limited
internal buffer (or even no buffer at all) and their default behavior is
to block the producer when the buffer is full, a single slow subscriber
might slow down the entire topic (which ensures that all subscribers
receive all messages). In fact, the topic’s throughput is determined by
that of its slowest subscriber. Sometimes, this behavior is not what we
want. We’d rather have slow consumers miss a few updates than slow down
everyone else. That’s why we have ticker channels.

A ticker-channel is a channel with a bounded buffer that employs a
policy that replaces the oldest value in the buffer with the newly added
value if the buffer is full (basically, it’s a circular buffer). A
ticker channel may have multiple consumers, each maintaining their own
position in the buffer. All consumers will then see the channel’s values
in the order they are sent to the channel, but a slow consumer might
miss some of them.

Let’s look at a Clojure example (Java code is similar):

    (let [t (channel 10 :displace)
          x (promise)
          f1 (spawn-fiber (fn []
                            (let [c (ticker-consumer t)]
                              (loop []
                                (when-let [m (rcv c)]
                                  (println "=>" (+ m @x))
                                  (recur))))))
          f2 (spawn-fiber (fn []
                            (let [c (ticker-consumer t)]
                              (loop []
                                (when-let [m (rcv c)]
                                  (println "->" (+ m @x))
                                  (sleep 500) ; slow consumer
                                  (recur))))))]
      (spawn-fiber (fn []
                     (sleep 1000)
                     (deliver x 5)))
      (spawn-fiber (fn []
                        (dotimes [i 100]
                          (sleep 100)
                          (snd t (rand-int 100)))
                        (close! t)))

      (join [f1 f2]))

The second fiber takes its time, and sleeps for 500ms between channel
reads. Nevertheless, the producer and the first channel move along at
full speed. The result is that the second fiber simply processes fewer
values.

Propagating errors
------------------

Before we move on to the functional style, let’s take a look at a
slightly more complex example. Suppose we have a stream of
floating-point values flowing into the system, and we’d like to emit
their sliding-window running average. We also don’t care if some of the
values are lost to the average computation because we want an
approximate average, but we don’t want a slow computation to slow down
the flow, so we’ll use a ticker channel. Here’s the complete Java
example (Clojure code would be similar):

    final int PORT = 1234;

    DoubleChannel t = Channels.newDoubleChannel(100, Channels.OverflowPolicy.DISPLACE);

    // This fiber reads values off a socket and sends them to the ticker channel, t
    new Fiber(() -> {
        try (FiberServerSocketChannel socket = FiberServerSocketChannel.open().bind(new InetSocketAddress(PORT));
                FiberSocketChannel ch = socket.accept()) {
            ByteBuffer buf = ByteBuffer.allocateDirect(100);

            for (;;) {
                buf.clear();
                int n = ch.read(buf); // blocks the fiber (but not the OS thread)
                assert n == 8; // we assume the message is sent in a single packet

                buf.flip();
                t.send(buf.getDouble());
            }
        } catch (Exception e) {
            t.close(e); // propagate exception to consumers
        }
    }).start();

    Channel<Double> avg = Channels.newChannel(10);

    // This fiber computes a sliding-window running average, and publishes the results to channel avg
    final int WINDOW_SIZE = 10;
    new Fiber(() -> {
        try {
            DoubleReceivePort c = Channels.newTickerConsumerFor(t); // primitive int channel with a buffer of size 3
            double[] window = new double[WINDOW_SIZE];
            long i = 0;
            for (;;) {
                window[(int) (i++ % WINDOW_SIZE)] = c.receiveDouble();

                double sum = 0.0;
                for (double x : window)
                    sum += x;
                double m = sum / (Math.min(WINDOW_SIZE, i));

                avg.send(m);
            }
        } catch (ReceivePort.EOFException e) {
            avg.close();
        } catch(ProducerException e) {
            avg.close(e.getCause()); // propagate exception to consumers
        }
    }).start();

    // This fiber prints out the running average
    new Fiber(() -> {
        try {
            for (;;) {
                Double x = avg.receive();
                if (x == null)
                    break;
                System.out.println("==> " + x);
            }
        } catch (ProducerException e) {
            System.out.println("Producer error: " + e.getCause().getClass().getName() + "(" + e.getCause().getMessage() + ")");
        }
    }).start();

    // This fiber prints out the raw values
    new Fiber(() -> {
        try {
            ReceivePort<Double> c = Channels.newTickerConsumerFor(t);
            for (;;) {
                Double x = c.receive();
                if (x == null)
                    break;
                System.out.println("-> " + x);
            }
        } catch (ProducerException e) {
            System.out.println("Producer error: " + e.getCause().getClass().getName() + "(" + e.getCause().getMessage() + ")");
        }
    }).start();

First, notice how the first fiber uses the familiar Java NIO API, except
that the blocking reads simply block the fiber rather than the OS thread
(this is accomplished by using asynchronous IO [under the
covers](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/06/fibers-threads-strands/)).
Also, note how any IO exception is propagated down the sequence of
channels with `channel.close(exception)`. This “close-with-exception”
operation (added in 0.5.0) lets us cleanly detect and report errors. If
you want to automate recovery from errors, you might want to consider
using [Quasar
actors](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/quasar/#quasars-actor-system),
which add powerful fault-tolerance capabilities (actors can read and
write to channels just like any fiber can).

The average-computing fiber transforms the value stream from one channel
and writes them to another. This is a common-enough pattern that we’ve
added a simpler API for that (also, just for fun, lets use the new Java
8 stream API to calculate the average). The fiber could also be written
like this (propagating errors and closing the output channel are handled
for us):

    Channels.fiberTransform(Channels.newTickerConsumerFor(t), avg,
            (DoubleReceivePort in, SendPort<Double> out) -> {
                try {
                    double[] window = new double[WINDOW_SIZE];
                    long i = 0;
                    for (;;) {
                        window[(int) (i++ % WINDOW_SIZE)] = in.receiveDouble();
                        out.send(Arrays.stream(window).average().getAsDouble());
                    }
                } catch (ReceivePort.EOFException e) {
                }
            });

Again, we used both primitive (`double`) channels and generic
(auto-boxing) channels – the two can be used interchangeably.

This example, like all previous ones, could have used plain threads
insead of fibers (simply changing `new Fiber` to `new Thread` everywhere
would do the trick), but while threads place a significant burden on the
system which [might become a serious
bottleneck](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/04/littles-law/),
fibers consume less resources and suffer a much lower scheduling latency
than kernel threads.

This imperative-reactive style, based on channels and lightweight
threads, is also called [Communicating Sequential
Processes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communicating_sequential_processes)
(CSP). That name describes the same thing but focuses on how it’s coded
rather than on what it tries to achieve, namely that the code does not
care when values are produced, and is thus separated from complex
concurrency concerns. This is the essence of reactive programming.

Functional Reactive Programming
-------------------------------

The previous example may have hinted to the fact that applying
transformations to “reactive values” is very common. [Functional
Reactive
Programming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_reactive_programming),
or FRP, takes functional programming’s use of operators (higher-order
functions) to transform data and applies it to the reactive programming
model.

Here’s a simple Java example using the `map` operator:

    Topic<Integer> t = new Topic<>();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
            Strand.sleep(100);
            t.send(ThreadLocalRandom.current().nextInt(100));
        }
        t.close();
    }).start();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        ReceivePort<Integer> c = t.subscribe(Channels.newChannel(0));
        for (Integer m; (m = c.receive()) != null;)
            System.out.println("-> " + m);
    }).start();

    new Fiber(() -> {
        ReceivePort<String> c = Channels.map(t.subscribe(Channels.newChannel(0)), 
                                    (Integer x) -> "my number is: " + x); // transform the channel
        for (String m; (m = c.receive()) != null;)
            System.out.println("=> " + m);
    }).start();

While the first fiber consumes the values as they are published by the
topic, the second transforms the integer channel into a string channel
using `map`.

Now let’s look at a more complex Clojure example:

    (use 'co.paralleluniverse.pulsar.core)
    (require '[co.paralleluniverse.pulsar.rx :as rx])

    (let [numbers (topic)
          letters (topic)

          f (spawn-fiber ; consumer
               (fn []
                 (let [c (->>
                           (rx/zip (->>
                                     (subscribe! letters (channel 0))
                                     (rx/mapcat #(repeat 3 %)))
                                   (->>
                                     (subscribe! numbers (channel 0))
                                     (rx/filter odd?)
                                     (rx/mapcat #(list % (* 10 %) (* 100 %)))))
                           (rx/map (fn [[c n]] (str "letter: " c " number: " n))))]
                   (loop []
                     (when-let [m (rcv c)]
                       (println "=> " m )
                       (recur))))))]
      ; spawn two producers                 
      (spawn-fiber (fn []
                     (doseq [x (seq "abcdefghijklmnopqrstuwvxyz")]
                       (sleep 50)
                       (snd letters x))
                     (close! letters)))

      (spawn-fiber (fn []
                     (doseq [x (range 1000)]
                       (sleep 70)
                       (snd numbers x))
                     (close! numbers)))

      (join [f]))

Let’s see what’s going on here. The two producer fibers emit a sequence
of numbers and the letters of the alphabet on two different topics, at
different rates.

The consumer subscribes to both topics, and transforms each. It repeats
each letter three times, and turns each odd number (it filters out the
even ones) into a sequence of three numbers (the original number, the
number multiplied by 10, and the number multiplied by 100). Then it zips
the two channels together into a channel of vectors, each containing a
letter and a number. Finally, it maps those vectors into a string.

The consumer doesn’t care that the values are produced at different
rates. It treats the topic channels as a kind of changing quantities
that it can transform without regard to concurrency concerns at all. In
a sense, it treats asynchronous streams of data as values to manipulate.

Java 8’s lambdas makes writing functional-style code a viable option.
For example, while writing the functional channel transformations in the
last example in Java prior to version 8 would have been messy, here is
what it looks like Java 8:

    // with import static co.paralleluniverse.strands.channels.Channels.*

    new Fiber(() -> {
        ReceivePort<String> c = zip(
                transform(numbers.subscribe(newChannel(0)))
                .filter(x -> x % 2 != 0)
                .flatmap(x -> toReceivePort(Arrays.asList(x, x * 10, x * 100))),
                
                transform(letters.subscribe(newChannel(0)))
                .flatmap(x -> toReceivePort(Collections.nCopies(3, x))),
                
                (num, letter) -> "letter: " + letter + " number: " + num);

        for (String m; (m = c.receive()) != null;)
            System.out.println("-> " + m);
    }).start();

Functional reactive programming often makes manipulation and composition
of asynchronous data simple and clear. However, FRP relies on functional
operators that at times may be cumbersome, and sometimes, if the right
operator is missing, writing your own might be hard without knowing the
details of how concurrency is treated, especially if the operator has
internal state. An example of a transformation with internal state is
the running average we showed earlier. Another may be one that simply
polls every fifth value:

    Channel<Integer> polled = newChannel(0);
    Channels.fiberTransform(numbers.subscribe(newChannel(0)), polled,
            (ReceivePort<Integer> in, SendPort<Integer> out) -> {
                long i = 0;
                for (;;) {
                    Integer v = in.receive();
                    if (v == null)
                        break;
                    if (i++ % 5 == 0)
                        out.send(v);
                }
            });

Or even emits a ticker channel’s values more slowly:

    Channel<Integer> polled = newChannel(0);
    Channels.fiberTransform(Channels.newTickerConsumerFor(t), polled,
            (ReceivePort<Integer> in, SendPort<Integer> out) -> {
                Integer v;
                while ((v = in.receive()) != null) {
                    out.send(v);
                    Strand.sleep(500);
                }
            });

Performing these transformations with FRP alone requires either [just
the right kind of pre-built
operator](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/14805392/rx-stateful-transform-of-sequence-e-g-exponential-moving-average),
or the use of a cumbersome state monad. But if imperative RP is
available to us, we can use it to complement the functional style.

There are certainly times when the functional style is clearer, and
times when the imperative style is much simpler. Imperative code can
also be used to write new functional stateful operators. Sometimes
people are forced to use the functional style to avoid blocking, but
because lightweight threads make blocking cheap, we can choose the right
tool for the job.

Reactive UI
-----------

Most UI toolkits, like Android or even OpenGL (well, not strictly a UI
toolkit), require that all updates to the rendered graphics occur [in a
special UI
thread](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3652560/what-is-the-android-uithread-ui-thread).
You’d think that we can’t directly use imperative reactive programming
as we’ve done so far on the UI thread because we’re not allowed to block
the UI thread. While we can’t directly read DelayedVals or channels on
the UI thread, we can actually do something better: we can schedule
fibers to execute on the UI thread. Those fibers can block or sleep all
they want without blocking the UI thread underneath (this capability was
added in the latest Quasar release, but it was buggy, and has since been
fixed).

While Android support for Quasar is planned (probably in version 0.7.0),
Quasar does not support Android just yet. So to demonstrate reactive UI,
we’ll use Swing:

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        // first, let's create the Swing UI:

        final JFrame frame = new JFrame("Reactive Window"); // a window
        frame.setDefaultCloseOperation(JFrame.EXIT_ON_CLOSE);
        final JPanel panel = new JPanel();
        frame.getContentPane().add(panel);
        final JLabel label1 = new JLabel(); // label 1
        final JLabel label2 = new JLabel(); // label 2
        label1.setFont(label2.getFont().deriveFont(100.0f)); // large font
        label2.setFont(label2.getFont().deriveFont(100.0f));

        SwingUtilities.invokeLater(new Runnable() {
            @Override
            public void run() {
                frame.setMinimumSize(new Dimension(600, 300));
                panel.add(label1);
                panel.add(label2);
                frame.pack();
                frame.setVisible(true);
            }
        });

        // Now we get to the reactive stuff:

        Channel<Integer> t = Channels.newChannel(1, Channels.OverflowPolicy.DISPLACE);
        DelayedVal<String> x = new DelayedVal<>();
        
        // publish lots of numbers:
        new Fiber(() -> {
            for (int i = 0;i < 100000; i++) {
                Strand.sleep(10);
                t.send(i);
            }
        }).start();

        // We'll make x available only 5 seconds from now:
        new Fiber(() -> {
            Strand.sleep(5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
            x.set("!!!");
        }).start();

        // Now let's create a fiber scheduler that runs fibers on the UI thread
        FiberScheduler UIScheduler = new FiberExecutorScheduler("UI-fiber-scheduler", new Executor() {
            @Override
            public void execute(Runnable command) {
                EventQueue.invokeLater(command);
            }
        });

        // set text for the first label
        new Fiber(UIScheduler, () -> {
            ReceivePort<Integer> c = Channels.newTickerConsumerFor(t);
            Integer num;
            while ((num = c.receive()) != null) {
                assert EventQueue.isDispatchThread(); // see, we really are on the UI thread!

                label1.setText("foo: " + num);
                Strand.sleep(100); // ... yet we can sleep
            }
        }).start();

        new Fiber(UIScheduler, () -> {
            ReceivePort<Integer> c = Channels.newTickerConsumerFor(t);
            Integer num;
            while ((num = c.receive()) != null) {
                // we block until x is available (in 5 seconds), even though we're on the UI thread
                label2.setText("bar: " + num + x.get()); 
                Strand.sleep(500); // update the second label more slowly
            }
        }).start();
    }

Here’s a screenshot (taken after 5 seconds, once the second label’s text
was ready):

![Reactive window screenshot](/images/reactive_screenshot.png)

The two UI fibers loop, block and sleep without affecting the
responsiveness of the UI at all (and yes, we could also perform length
fiber-blocking IO in those UI fibers). Such is the power of lightweight
threads combined with reactive programming!

Other JVM Reactive Programming Libraries
----------------------------------------

Netflix’s [RxJava](https://github.com/Netflix/RxJava), based on .Net’s
Reactive Extensions is a functional (only) reactive programming library
using “observables” as the core construct. It has a large selection of
functional operators and specicialized APIs for various JVM languages.
[rxjava-quasar](https://github.com/puniverse/RxJava/tree/master/rxjava-contrib/rxjava-quasar)
is a (yet unreleased) integration module for RxJava and Quasar. It
provides dead-simple conversions from Quasar channels to Observables and
vice-versa, as well as a scheduler that runs the functional operators
inside Quasar fibers.

[core.async](https://github.com/clojure/core.async) is a Clojure-only
reactive programming library modelled after Go channels, which supports
both functional and imperative styles. It has several limitations due to
the fact that its fiber-like construct, the “go block”, [is not a true
lightweight
thread](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/06/fibers-threads-strands/).
On the other hand it is able to run not only on the JVM, but also in the
browser using Clojure’s JavaScript implementation, ClojureScript. Also,
it’s a very nice API. Pulsar provides the core.async API, as well (all
the important stuff is there, and we’ll support the whole thing soon).
Pulsar’s core.async implementation is fully interchangeable with
Pulsar’s “native” API, has better performance than the original
implementation, removes the mentioned limitations (for example, the !<
and !!< operations, and in fact all single-bang/double-bang operators,
are interchangeable), and interoperates with any JVM language making use
of Quasar.

Conclusion
----------

We’ve seen how reactive programming helps tackle concurrency by
isolating the computations from any concerns of when their input data
arrives, and how both functional and imperative code can make use of
reactive programming. We’ve also shown examples of the reactive
constructs provided by Quasar and Pulsar, and how they can be used.
Whether you use reactive programming in the imperative or the functional
style (or, my personal preference, a combination of both), I hope you
appreciate how it helps process asynchronous data and distribute it
throught the application in clear, simple flows.

This was just a taste of Quasar’s capabilities. Quasar and Pulsar also
have a rich and very Erlang-like distributed actor system; Quasar fibers
provide extremely scalable blocking IO operations, useful in themselves
even without reactive programming;
[Comsat](https://github.com/puniverse/comsat) uses Quasar fibers and
fiber-blocking IO to scale JVM web applications, while keeping the same
familiar, standard APIs.

The next version of Quasar/Pulsar, 0.5.0 will be released in time for
the general availability of Java 8 about a month from today, but you
could start using the latest realease or the development version right
away. So go browse the [Quasar](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/quasar/)
and [Pulsar](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/quasar/) documentation, and
feel free to fork their GitHub repos right now:
[https://github.com/puniverse/quasar](https://github.com/puniverse/quasar)
,
[https://github.com/puniverse/pulsar](https://github.com/puniverse/pulsar)

[Discuss on Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7271717)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Join our mailing list
---------------------

Sign up to receive news and updates.

Tags: [quasar](/tagged/quasar), [pulsar](/tagged/pulsar)
--------------------------------------------------------

Please enable JavaScript to view the [comments powered by
Disqus.](http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript)

[comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

-   [Products](#)
    -   [Comsat](http://paralleluniverse.co/comsat/)
    -   [Quasar](http://paralleluniverse.co/quasar/)
    -   [Spacebase](http://paralleluniverse.co/spacebase/)
    -   [Galaxy](http://paralleluniverse.co/galaxy/)

-   [Support](http://paralleluniverse.co/support/)
-   [Documentation](http://docs.paralleluniverse.co/)
-   [Company](http://paralleluniverse.co/about/)
-   [Blog](http://blog.paralleluniverse.co)


This markdown document has been converted from the html document located at:
http://blog.paralleluniverse.co/2014/02/20/reactive/
