[![Rendered Text](/images/layout/site_logo.png)](/ "Home")

-   [Work](/work)
-   [Team](/team)
-   [Community](/community)
-   [Toolbox](/toolbox)
-   [Contact](/contact)
-   [Blog](/blog)

[Feed](http://feeds.feedburner.com/RenderedText)

January 30, 2014 by Marko

[Become an exceptional programmer by learning to ship](/blog/2014/01/30/become-an-exceptional-programmer-by-learning-to-ship/)
==============================================================================================================================

It seems like there is always a shortage of good programmers; that is
why programming is one of the highest paid professions today. Note that
there is no shortage of programmers in general. Companies that need a
high body count in order to be formally capable of negotiating certain
kinds of deals do not have a problem finding people for that. But I am
not interested in that kind of a programmer. I am interested in those
who love their craft and want to create something meaningful.

Such programmers need to stand out of the crowd when starting their
career in order to work in a company that is a satisfying place to be
in. These companies typically say something like, we hire through open
source. When we at Rendered Text post a job ad, we always mention as a
requirement that the person applying should have shipped at least one
project to end users, be it open source or otherwise. Because sometimes
cause and effect get confused, I want to explore a bit what that means
exactly.

What does it mean to ship?

Young programmers, due to lack of experience, sometimes don’t see that
writing code is only a small part in producing software. To borrow from
the terminology presented in the famous book *The Mythical Man-Month* by
Frederick Brooks, at the beginning we have a program. It is standing
alone on a drive somewhere, not used by anyone and not interacting with
other components in some kind of a production system. This is the
easiest thing to accomplish, because generally we work alone and can
declare the code as “finished” at any point in time.

It is more expensive to produce a *programming product*. This now
involves shipping your code to the public. Desktop apps need to be
easily installable. If the program is a library you need to polish the
API, hopefully refactor the code to some degree, provide some tests,
write documentation, write and publish a public announcement. The moment
all that is completed, you enter a phase of maintenance: you begin to
communicate with your users, perhaps contributors as well. You also need
to repeat the process of developing and releasing new versions.

So for example, publishing source code of an implementation of an audio
compression algorithm on GitHub is not shipping. On the other hand, a
library with multiple versions, downloaded and used by hundreds of
developers is a clear indicator of shipping behavior.

Most software needs to interact with other parts of a system in order to
become alive and useful. You need to make sure that your program is
stable and works efficiently with other components. For example, a web
application needs to use a database and system memory. Writing code for
mining data from a remote API is a good first step; making sure that
it’s a runnable application that can scale to many users over a long
period of time is a different matter.

Useful software then is a product that works well in a production
system, and shipping means developing useful software. Any software
company’s best interest is to avoid hiring programmers who are not
capable of persisting through all phases of development over a long
period of time. People do drop off for whatever reason, some of who
unfortunately have brilliant coding skills. There are more aspects to
hiring of course, but demonstrating that you’ve been capable of shipping
something in the past is definitely a requirement in any good software
company.

[View the discussion
thread.](http://disqus.com/forums/renderedtextblog/?url=ref)

[Comments powered by Disqus](http://disqus.com)

### [Recent Entries](/blog)

1.  #### [Become an exceptional programmer by learning to ship](/blog/2014/01/30/become-an-exceptional-programmer-by-learning-to-ship/)

    January 30, 2014.
    [comments](/blog/2014/01/30/become-an-exceptional-programmer-by-learning-to-ship/#disqus_thread)

2.  #### [Learn Elixir to stay young](/blog/2014/01/21/learn-elixir-to-stay-young/)

    January 21, 2014.
    [comments](/blog/2014/01/21/learn-elixir-to-stay-young/#disqus_thread)

3.  #### [Goodbye 2013](/blog/2013/12/30/goodbye-2013/)

    December 30, 2013.
    [comments](/blog/2013/12/30/goodbye-2013/#disqus_thread)

4.  #### [CTRL+FLOW 2 - Notes](/blog/2013/12/19/ctrl-flow-notes/)

    December 19, 2013.
    [comments](/blog/2013/12/19/ctrl-flow-notes/#disqus_thread)

5.  #### [Rendered Text implements table management for Reservation Genie](/blog/2013/12/16/rendered-text-implements-table-management-for-reservation-genie/)

    December 16, 2013.
    [comments](/blog/2013/12/16/rendered-text-implements-table-management-for-reservation-genie/#disqus_thread)

### [Archives](/blog/archive)
