[Dr. Bunsen](/ "Dr. Bunsen.")
=============================

![image](/static/bunsen-thumb.svg)

created by [Seth Brown](http://www.drbunsen.org/about/)

-   [Archives](/archives/)
-   [Projects](https://github.com/drbunsen)
-   [About](/about/)
-   [Contact](mailto:sethbrown@drbunsen.org)
-   [Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=DrBunsen)
-   [Feed](/feed.xml "Atom feed")
-   [Search](http://nerdquery.com/?catid=19&category=18&setcss1=)

Matryoshka Hardware
-------------------

July 10, 2013\
 [review](/tag/review/) [workflow](/tag/workflow/)

### Introduction

Most activities that I do require a combination of activity-specific
gear and a set of more general core hardware. A ski trip requires
specific gear like skies and gloves, but also core hardware like a
wallet and a good book. I’ve found that most activities of the same
duration and complexity share the same set of core hardware. For
example, a 3 day ski adventure, scientific conference, or holiday
weekend requires much of the same core hardware.

A byproduct of this division between activity-specific gear and core
hardware is that core hardware naturally organizes into layers. Core
hardware that I use for shorter duration activities serves as the
foundation for core hardware that I carry for longer duration
activities. A smaller set of core hardware integrates into the layer
above it. Each layer subsumes the previous layer like a series of
[Matryoshka dolls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matryoshka_doll).

Nesting hardware like Matryoshka dolls has numerous advantages. It
minimizes hardware redundancy and *ipso facto* reduces the number of
items that need to be carried. Predetermined hardware configurations
facilitates faster packing with greater fidelity. It’s harder to forget
important items using logical hardware layers. This post explains my
views about hardware abstraction and describes 3 of my core hardware
layers that I use to get things done.

-   [Layers](#layers)
-   [Every Day Carry](#edc)
-   [Extended Carry Items](#ec)
-   [Bug-out Bag](#bob)

### Layers

The atom of my hardware is an [Every Day
Carry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everyday_carry) (EDC). This layer
is composed of the minimal set of gear that I carry each day. The items
I carry in this layer go with me everywhere. I dislike carrying things,
so this hardware layer aims to be high functional albeit with minimal
size and weight.

In situations where my EDC is insufficient, I add additional items to
the EDC to form layers with more functionality. The next layer up from
my EDC is my Extended Carry Items (ECI). I use Extended Carry Items on
longer day trips or in other contexts where I need more functionality
than my EDC can provide. For activities where I need yet more hardware,
I merge my ECI with more gear to form my [Bug-out
Bag](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bug-out_bag)(BOB).^[1](#fn:fn1)^ My
BOB is typically used for longer, usually multi-day, excursions.

### EDC

My base EDC hardware layer is composed of a knife, keychain, wallet and
a phone:

![image](/static/images/posts/edc.jpg)

At the foundation of my EDC is a good knife. I’ve tried many knives in
my kit, but my favorite is the [Benchmade Osbourne
Mini-Barrage](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B003G632L4/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B003G632L4&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
Benchmade manufactures ideal EDC blades. They’re of high quality and are
reasonably priced, so I’m not afraid to abuse this knife. The
Mini-Barrage is an ideal EDC blade because it’s the perfect size—large
enough to fit comfortably in my hand when open and compact enough to fit
comfortability in my pocket when closed. I also like the [AXIS-assist
design](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oIoub3TFtJY) which facilitates
opening the knife with one hand:

![image](/static/images/posts/barrage.jpg)

For a key ring, I use the [titanium short-coated
wire](http://www.uniquetitanium.com/Short-Coated-Wire-Keychain_p_71.html).
It has a unique design that only opens when it is twisted into a special
shape. I find that it never accidentally comes apart like [screw-type
key rings](http://www.countycomm.com/ring.html) that I’ve used. The
ability to open and close the keychain also allows me to take tools or
spare keys on and off for modularity and easier use.^[2](#fn:fn2)^ It
also allows me to fasten the keychain to a backpack or other object so I
don’t misplace my keys. This design minimizes bulk by eliminating the
need to carry a bulky carabiner or other attachment device.

I carry three items on my short-coated wire—[an LRI Photon
light](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0007D5TKQ/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0007D5TKQ&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20),
[USB
stick](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B006W8U2WU/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B006W8U2WU&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20),
and an [Atwood tool](http://www.atwoodknives.com/). The Photon is ideal
for reading, unlocking a door at night, or finding something in the
bottom of a backpack. It’s extremely bright, compact, and inexpensive. I
use a USB for transferring photos or [presentation
slides](/designing-a-beamer-template-theme/) for talks. I also keep
several privacy and encryption tools on it like
[tails](https://tails.boum.org/). My current USB drive is a [Kensington
DataTraveler](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B006W8U2WU/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B006W8U2WU&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20)—it’s
small, fairly durable, and has a nice attachment eyelet. The last tool
on my keychain is a [Atwood Titanium
Wrunt](http://www.atwoodknives.com/). I use the tool for all sorts of
tasks such as prying, screwing, scraping, and [researching
beer](/beer-selection/). The Wrunt is an excellent complement to the
Barrage. Together, these two tools can be used for a wide array of
applications:

![image](/static/images/posts/keychain.jpg)

The iPhone is also part of my EDC. The apps I use everyday include
Omnifocus and Downcast. Here’s a
[screenshot](/static/images/posts/iphone-screen-shot.jpg).

The last item in my EDC is a money clip. I dislike wallets because
they’re bulky and prone to dropping their contents. For a money clip, I
stole an idea from
[Instructables](http://www.instructables.com/id/10-Innovated-Uses-for-Binder-Clips/?ALLSTEPS)
and use a binder clip. Binder clips take up almost no room in my pocket,
costs pennies, and securely hold money and credit cards. They’re also
multi-purpose and have [many other
uses](http://www.buzzfeed.com/kevindanger/54-uses-for-binder-clips-that-will-change-your-lif-555z).
Another feature I like is that the binder clip can be flipped up and
placed onto my short-coated wire. I find this extremely useful if I’m at
the gym or any place where I don’t have pockets. I also wrap my money
clip with a [ranger
band](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_band#Ranger_bands) for added
stability. The band can also be repurposed for other tasks as well.

### Extended Carry

The next level up from my base EDC is my Extended Carry Items. This
module adds three additional items to my EDC—[an
iPad](/static/images/posts/ipad-screen-shot.jpg), a
[notebook](/custom-notebooks/), and an organizer:

![image](/static/images/posts/eci.jpg)

The majority of my ECI is housed in a [Maxpedition Pocket
Organizer](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B002DAL540/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B002DAL540&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
The Maxpedition excels at keeping numerous small pieces of hardware
organized in a compact footprint. It has numerous attachment points,
pockets, and lashing straps for organizing gear. The small profile makes
the organizer easy to carry by itself or in a pack. Most of the gear I
carry in the ECI is not directly visible in this picture. Here are a few
of the items I carry in the Maxpedition:

**[Sunwayman
V11R](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007VDX6IM/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B007VDX6IM&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20)**:
This is a fantastic light that strikes a nice balance between price,
size, and performance. I carry this model for its [output-to-runtime
efficiency](http://goo.gl/rfTi1), optional AA battery compatibility, and
continuously variable beam control. The light is equally adept in
situations where I need a low-intensity beam for an extended period of
time or in specialized circumstances where I want to throw a 500 lumen
blast. The light also makes a great lantern when attached with paracord
to a
[Grimlock](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00199NUJY/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B00199NUJY&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20):

![image](/static/images/posts/v11r.jpg)

**Distraction countermeasures**: Sometimes I need to concentrate on the
work that I’m doing or tune out disruptions to facilitate sleeping.
Distraction countermeasures are absolutely indispensable in my ECI. I
carry ear plugs and [Etymotic Research HF3
headphones](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007TCXGVC/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B007TCXGVC&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
The ear plugs are primarily used for sleeping on planes, trains, and
automobiles. When I’m coding or doing almost any kind of work where I
need to focus, [I listen to music](/the-five-greatest-coding-albums/).
The HF3 has reasonable audio quality, takes up little room, and has a
nice mic and iPhone controls.

**[Adenosine
triphosphate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adenosine_triphosphate)**:
For sustenance, I always keep a few snacks in my ECI. These items are
handy when I don’t have time to eat [Bieber, Gaga, and Eastwood for
breakfast](/bieber-gaga-eastwood-breakfast/) or if I don’t have access
to food such as on a plane or in the backcountry. I like to carry
[Pemmican](http://www.grasslandbeef.com/Detail.bok?no=1209) on shorter
trips, but it has a short shelf-life and isn’t part of my ECI. Instead,
I carry [Active Green
Bars](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0009O7802/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0009O7802&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20),
which have a reasonable nutritional profile for a pre-packaged bar.
These bars are good for long-term storage in the ECI because they don’t
have a coating that can melt and remain chewy even when cold.

**Cable Management**: Organizing cables is a real pain. When unmanaged,
cables get wrapped around other gear and twisted together making them
hard to work with. My ECI has to deal with headphones, cables for my
iPhone/iPad, as well as any cables for other activity-specific gear I
may be carrying. I’ve found three useful cable management gadgets that
remove most of the cable organizing frustrations. [Conventional cable
ties](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00004WLJ2/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B00004WLJ2&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20),
[reusable Velcro cable
ties](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001E1Y5O6/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B001E1Y5O6&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20),
and [Applecore cable
oganizers](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0063JHZGE/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0063JHZGE&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).

**Repair**: Stuff breaks. Sometimes it’s gear, sometimes it’s me. I try
to be prepared for these events and mitigate any issues before they
become a problem. Some of the multi-functional items I carry for repair
tasks include safety pins and a [pocket
screwdriver](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0014KMDZ0/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0014KMDZ0&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
For hands specific protection, I keep nail clippers, safety pins, hand
repair creme, and hand sanitizer:^[3](#fn:fn3)^. A favorite repair item
of mine is [Gorilla
tape](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00C78AERW/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B00C78AERW&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
It’s the [best kind of
tape](http://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/gadgets/tests/4306415)
and has almost unlimited uses. I like to use it for things like
protecting blisters on my feet or patching a holes in a water bottle. I
keep Gorilla tape spooled around the sheath of an old pen as a
dispenser. This design also allows me to store spare paracord in a
[Solomon Bar](http://www.animatedknots.com/cobra/):

![image](/static/images/posts/tape.jpg)

**Writing/Drawing**: I keep a few writing and drawing instruments in my
ECI. Currently, my main workhorse is a [Retro 51
Hex-o-matic](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B003QIMPV0/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B003QIMPV0&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
The Hex-o-matic ships as a ballpoint, but I use it with the excellent
[Schmidt 8900 Superbowl
refills](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0038HZ3YK/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0038HZ3YK&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
This refill is unusual in that it transforms the Hex-o-matic into a
liquid ink rollerball. I like rollerballs because they write well on
most surfaces like a ballpoint and are smooth with good ink flow like a
fountain pen. I also carry several Faber Castell Pitt pens for
situations where I need to lay own a lot of ink. If the Pitt pens are
[good enough for Don Colley](http://vimeo.com/49032722), they’re good
enough for me.^[4](#fn:fn4)^

**Weatherproofing**: Several items in my ECI are prone to weather
damage. I store my iPhone in my ECI inside a waterproof ziplock freezer
bag. I also need to keep small items like extra money, my USB stick, and
SD cards safe and dry. I find [conical
tubes](http://www.bdbiosciences.com/cellculture/tubes/features/index.jsp)
to be an excellent storage containers. They’re lightweight, waterproof,
crush-resistant, and can even hold liquids. Conical tubes are perfect
containers for compartmentalizing small hardware items as well. My ECI
can hold two 50 milliliter conical tubes for small hardware items and
one 15 mL tube that I use for storing hand sanitizer. The contents of
one 50mL tube include—Advil, spare money, an SD card, a MagSafe 2
converter, ear plugs, and [Velcro cable
ties](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001E1Y5O6/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B001E1Y5O6&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20):

![image](/static/images/posts/conical-tube.jpg)

### BOB

The next level up in my hardware is the Bug-out Bag (BOB). I use this
configuration in situations where my Extended Carry is insufficient. The
BOB is designed to hold enough gear for a day to a week. I use one of
two different bags as my BOBs depending on the situation. Both BOBs have
a volume of roughly 25 liters, which I find is small enough to easily
carry, yet large enough to hold adequate core hardware and activity
specific-gear. The core hardware contents of either pack are the same.

Deciding what bag to carry largely hinges on weight and how long I need
to carry a load. For most urban settings I select the [Tom Bihn Empire
Builder](http://www.tombihn.com/laptop_bags/TB0730.html).^[6](#fn:fn6)^
The bag has a well thought out design that supposedly took 3 years to
develop. The pockets are positioned well the carrying handles are
extremely comfortable. I especially like the integration with the
[Braincell](http://www.tombihn.com/PROD/TB0300.html) for securely
carrying a laptop:

![image](/static/images/posts/empire.jpg)

The other pack I use is the [Arcteryx
Quintic](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007VM7TJU/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B007VM7TJU&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).^[7](#fn:fn7)^
I’ve just started using this pack after retiring an older BOB. The
Quintic has a unique design that was developed primarily for backcountry
skiing. The main access point to the central compartment is through the
side of the pack. I like this feature because I can spin the pack around
one shoulder to gain access to the Quintic’s contents while skiing,
hiking, or maneuvering through a city. The best feature of this pack
though is how well it carries a load. It was designed to hug a skier
during descents and I find this quality translates to everyday
situations as well:

![image](/static/images/posts/quintic.jpg)

Here are a few of the items I carry in my BOB:

**Compression Sacks**: An indispensable item in my BOB is the mighty
compression sack. Compression sacks are designed to compact gear into
smaller spaces. I usually carry several of these in my BOB. They provide
a way to compartmentalize gear and to carry more things in less space. I
like Granite Gear compression sacks in particular. I use several models
ranging from the [extremely light
weight](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00B5F6V2A/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B00B5F6V2A&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20)
to [waterproof
models](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B004WVUXNC/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B004WVUXNC&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
My favorite models are semi-translucent making it easier to spot items
inside the sack:

![image](/static/images/posts/compression-sack.jpg)

**Liquids**: A staple in my BOB is water. I carry water in the [Platypus
plusBottle](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001AQM330/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B001AQM330&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20)
and/or the [Big Zip
SL](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0015ZJLJK/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0015ZJLJK&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).
I use several Platypus products primarily because they’re the only
company I’ve found that doesn’t make water taste like plastic. When not
in use, Platypus products weigh next to nothing and fold down to takes
up little pack space. Another liquid I like to carry in my BOB is
[Spike](http://www.t-nation.com/store/products/spike-shooter). I have
almost no response to coffee or other caffeine-based stimulants, but the
combination of N-acetyl-Tyrosine and Yohimbine in Spike is a wonderful
stimulant and a nice addition to my ECI distraction countermeasures.

**Technical Wear**: Two jackets that seem to always find their way into
my BOB are the Patagonia
[Supercell](http://www.patagonia.com/us/product/mens-super-cell-waterproof-jacket-with-gore-tex?p=83821-0-744)
and [Retro-X
Vest](http://www.patagonia.com/us/product/mens-classic-retro-x-fleece-vest?p=23047-0-768)
jackets. I usually pack the Supercell in my BOB to safeguard against
precipitation and [I wear the Retro-X
everywhere](https://twitter.com/DrBunsen/status/272780958720204800). The
combination of these jackets can handle a huge range of weather I
encounter and both jackets are extremely lightweight and packable.

**Books**: A good book is an essential BOB item. I usually alternate
between reading one technical and one recreational. A few of my favorite
recent recreational books have been [Seeking
Wisdom](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1578644283/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1578644283&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20),
[Ghost in the
Wires](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0316037702/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0316037702&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20)
and [The Psychology of
Persuasion](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/006124189X/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=006124189X&linkCode=as2&tag=drbunsenblog-20).

* * * * *

1.  I’m borrowing the terms EDC and Bug-out Bag which generally has a
    more survivalist/tactical connotation.
    [↩](#fnref:fn1 "Jump back to footnote 1 in the text")

2.  I wish the short-coated wire was a touch longer. It’s usually not a
    problem for me, but the length of the wire makes it difficult to
    fasten if there are many items on the keychain.
    [↩](#fnref:fn2 "Jump back to footnote 2 in the text")

3.  Note that this is not a man-purse. Man-purses have shoulder straps.
    Man-purses are cool though, Indiana Jones carried one.
    [↩](#fnref:fn3 "Jump back to footnote 3 in the text")

4.  Hand sanitizer, hand repair creme, and lip balm are excellent fire
    starting reagents.
    [↩](#fnref:fn4 "Jump back to footnote 4 in the text")

5.  Don Colley is my favorite contemporary artist. John Thornton’s [Have
    Pen Will Travel](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JmSsq39n-LE) is a
    good introduction.
    [↩](#fnref:fn5 "Jump back to footnote 5 in the text")

6.  I really like Tom Bihn. I received the Empire Builder as a birthday
    gift a few years ago and it arrived directly from Tom Bihn [hand
    decorated](https://twitter.com/DrBunsen/status/221363789310857216)
    by the employees.
    [↩](#fnref:fn6 "Jump back to footnote 6 in the text")

7.  Quintic is a peculiar name for this pack; was it named after a
    [fifth order
    polynomial](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quintic_function)?
    [↩](#fnref:fn7 "Jump back to footnote 7 in the text")

Powered by [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/). Hosted on
[S3](http://aws.amazon.com/s3/). Created by [Seth Brown](/about/).
Licensed under [CC-BY](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).
